# Sub-Chapter 4. Flight Training

**Sub-Chapter 4. Flight Training**

Post-9/11 GI Bill education benefits are available for flight training programs. Flight training refers to programs for those who want to learn a specific piloting skill or earn a qualification. Here are some examples of vocational flight training programs:

* Airline Transport Pilot (ATP)
* Rotary Wing Qualification
* B747-400 Qualification
* Dual Engine Qualification
* Flight Engineer

**Qualifications (if the flight training is not part of a degree program):**

* An individual must have a private pilot’s license, and
* A valid medical certification must be obtained before training begins.

**a. Benefit Payment Details**

Under the Post-9/11 GI Bill, benefits for flight training will depend on the type of school where the claimant is training.

**b. Flight Training as Part of a Degree Program at a Public Institution of Higher Learning (such as an In-state College or University)**

Benefits include:

* Reimbursement of the net in-state charges for tuition and fees are paid directly to the school (pro-rated based on the individual’s benefit level).

* A Books and Supplies Stipend of up to $1,000 per academic year (pro-rated based on the individual’s benefit level) is paid to the student based on the number of credits in which he/she is enrolled in for each term.
* A Monthly Housing Allowance based on the Department of Defense’s (DoD’s) Basic Allowance for Housing (BAH) rate for the school’s ZIP Code [pro-rated based on the Rate of Pursuit (RoP) and individual’s benefit level]. It is paid to the student and re-released for each month of attendance until the end date of each term.

* Yellow Ribbon payments are paid directly to the school if the individual is eligible at the 100% benefit level, the charges exceed the tuition and fees payable, and the IHL is a Yellow Ribbon program participant.

**c. Flight Training as Part of a Degree Program at a Private Institution of Higher Learning**

Benefits include:

* Tuition and fees are paid directly to the school and are pro-rated based on the individual’s benefit level. VA may reimburse up to the annual maximum per academic year for tuition and fees, unless the [“](https://vbaw.vba.va.gov/bl/22/manual/source-documents/glossary-terms.html#G)Grandfathering” provision applies.

* A Books and Supplies Stipend of up to $1,000 per academic year (pro-rated based on the individual’s benefit level) is paid to the student based on the number of credits in which he/she is enrolled in for each term.
* A Monthly Housing Allowance based on the Department of Defense’s (DoD’s) Basic Allowance for Housing (BAH) rate for the school’s ZIP Code [pro-rated based on the Rate of Pursuit (RoP) and individual’s benefit level]. It is paid to the student and re-released for each month of attendance until the end date of each term.

* Yellow Ribbon payments are paid directly to the school if the individual is eligible at the 100% benefit level, the charges exceed the tuition and fees payable, and the IHL is a Yellow Ribbon program participant.

**d. Flight Training at a Vocational Flight School (Non-Degree)**

Benefits include:

* Reimbursement of the full cost of the training or the annual maximum for the academic year for training at a vocational flight school, whichever is less (pro-rated based on the individual’s benefit level).

Monthly housing allowance benefits and the books and supplies stipend are not available when training in a non-degree program at a vocational school. Benefit payments are issued after training has taken place and the charges are submitted to VA by the school.

 

Learn more about benefit payments.

 

***Sources***

[PL 111-377](https://www.congress.gov/111/plaws/publ377/PLAW-111publ377.pdf), Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act of 2010, Title II Other Educational Assistance Matters, Section 105. Educational Assistance for Programs of Education Other than Programs of Education Leading to a Degree

Training Slides PL111-377

 

**Tools**

Search WEAMS for a participating program

Last updated: 

Tuesday, October 6, 2015

 [Go To Top](#TOP)