# Part 05, Chapter 30. Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues

**Part 5: Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues**

[4.01  Purpose](#401)  
  
**[Subchapter 1](#SI). [Reserved for Future Use]**  
[4.02  [Reserved for Future Use]](#402)  
[4.03  [Reserved for Future Use]](#403)  
[4.04  [Reserved for Future Use]](#404)  
[4.05  [Reserved for Future Use]](#405)  
  
**[Subchapter 2](#SII). Miscellaneous Issues**  
[4.06  Certificates of Eligibility](#406)  
[4.07  Change in Original Entitlement -- Kicker Involved](#407)   
[4.08  Change of Program](#408)  
[4.09  Confirmed Enrollments](#409)  
[4.10  Cooperative Training](#410)  
[4.11  Death Benefit](#411)  
[4.12  First Notice of Death Processing](#412)  
[4.13  Effective Date of [Original] Awards](#413)  
[4.14  Lump Sum Award Adjustments](#414)  
[4.15  Manual Entitlement Computations](#415)  
[4.16  Override Indicator on BDN Award Lines](#416)  
[4.17  Refunds](#417)  
[4.18  [Reserved for Future Use]](#418)  
[4.19  [Reserved for Future Use]](#419)  
  
**[Subchapter 3](#SIII). Category II Issues**  
[4.20  [Reserved for Future Use]](#420)  
[4.21  Buy Back of Chapter 34 Entitlement](#421)  
[4.22  Changes to Chapter 34 Remaining Entitlement](#422)  
[4.23  Chapter 34 Award Adjustments -- Effect on Chapter 30](#423)  
[4.24  Dependency](#424)  
[4.25  [Reserved for Future Use]](#425)  
  
**[Subchapter 4.](#SIV) Procedures for OJT/Apprenticeship, Correspondence, and Flight Awards**  
[4.26  [Chapter 30] PC Payment System](#426)  
[4.27  Finance Activities](#427)  
[4.28  [Education Division] Activities](#428)  
[4.29  Letters](#429)  
[4.30  Comparison to Other Out-of-System Award Processing](#430)  
  
**[Subchapter 5.](#SV) Automatic Rate Increases**  
[4.31  Background](#431)  
[4.32  Chapter 30 [BDN] Changes](#432)  
[4.33  Automated Adjustments](#433)  
[4.34  Review and Adjustment of Awards](#434)  
[4.35  Chapter 30 PC System Awards](#435)  
[4.36  One-Time Notice](#436)  
[4.37  End Product Credit](#437)  
  
**Figures**  
[4.01  PC System Apprenticeship Award Tearsheet](#f401)  
[4.02  PC Correspondence Award Tearsheet](#f402)  
[4.03  PC Flight Award Tearsheet](#f403)  
[4.04  PC Amended Award On-the-Job Training Award Tearsheet](#f404)

**4.01  PURPOSE**

---

This chapter provides procedures that are unique to [chapter 30] claims processing.  See [Part 3: Chapter 1 - Administrative Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073486?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) and  [Part 4: Chapter 1 - Enrollment Certification](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073421?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) for claims processing instructions which apply to all benefits.

**a.  [Subchapter I.](#SI)**  [Subchapter I is reserved for future use.]

**b.  [Subchapter II.](#SII)**  Subchapter II addresses miscellaneous award processing issues.

**c.  [Subchapter III.](#SIII)**  Subchapter III contains issues peculiar to category II cases.

**d.  [Subchapter IV.](#SIV)**  Subchapter IV contains procedures for processing apprenticeship/OJT (On-the-Job Training), correspondence, or flight awards on the Chapter 30 PC (Personal Computer) Payment System in each of the RPOs (Regional Processing Offices).

**e.  [Subchapter V.](#SV)**  contains procedures for processing automatic rate increases. 

**SUBCHAPTER I.  [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]**

**4.02  [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]**

---

 **4.03  [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]**

---

 **4.04  [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]**

---

 **4.05  [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]**

---

 **SUBCHAPTER II.  MISCELLANEOUS ISSUES**

**4.06  CERTIFICATES OF ELIGIBILITY**

---

Use BDN to generate C/Es (Certificates of Eligibility) as described in paragraph 2.07[.](https://vbaw.vba.va.gov/bl/22/ref/m22-4/Part%20V/ch02.htm#207)  Sometimes the BDN-generated form is not sufficient, even using the narrative spaces.  In that case, send a locally produced letter which includes all the standard paragraphs of the BDN-produced C/E shown in paragraph 7.16.

**4.07  CHANGE IN ORIGINAL ENTITLEMENT -- KICKER INVOLVED**

---

 *NOTE:  For other entitlement issues, see paragraphs [4.15](#415), [4.21](#421), [4.22,](#422) [and 4.23.](#423)*

The monthly rate for a kicker is based on the amount of an individual's entitlement to chapter 30 benefits.  The system adds the monthly kicker amount to the monthly basic educational assistance to arrive at a total monthly rate.

**a.  Awards Where Changes to Entitlement Are Involved**.  If any entries which change an individual's entitlement are made on the 310 screen, process an award to cover all periods the individual has been awarded chapter 30 benefits since the RAD (Release From Active Duty) date.

**b.  Recomputation of Monthly Rate**.  An award prepared according to [subparagraph a](#407a) above will cause all monthly rates to be recomputed as necessary.

EXAMPLE 1:  [A veteran has been paid chapter 30 benefits since March 15, 1998.  Her original entitlement of 19 months is based on a 2-year initial obligation with a hardship discharge after 19 months.  Her monthly rate includes a kicker computed based on 19 months entitlement as a veteran.  She enters the Selected Reserve on April 28, 1998, in a 2 by 4 program.  First, enter 4/28/98 as the ESR (Entered Selected Reserve) date on the 310 screen which will cause her original entitlement to be recalculated to provide an additional 12 months of entitlement, plus 19 months based on active duty for a total of 31 months.  Then enter an amended award effective March 15, 1998, because the kicker has been recalculated based on the change in entitlement.  An award line with beginning reason code 71 will be generated effective April 28, 1998, along with an increased monthly rate .

EXAMPLE 2:  Using the same facts described in example 1, this veteran is released from the Selected Reserve on June 23, 1998, for reasons which are unacceptable for granting eligibility to chapter 30 benefits.  Enter 6/23/98 as the RSR (Released from Selected Reserve) date on the 310 screen.  Then process an amended award effective March 15, 1998, to include all periods she was awarded benefits as a veteran.  This procedure is required because the kicker is recalculated based on the change in original entitlement.]

**c.  Periods Where Benefits Were Previously Paid Rate for Servicepersons**.  It is not necessary to include any period(s) the individual has been awarded benefits as a serviceperson since these rates will not change as a result of the change in entitlement.

**4.08  CHANGE OF PROGRAM**

---

Follow the procedures in [Part 4, Award Issues. Chapter 4 - Change of Program](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073551?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&).  Note that the initial program under chapter 30 will always be regarded as the first program regardless of prior training in different programs under other chapters.  [(See [Part 4, Award Issues. Chapter 4 - Change of Program](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073551?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), par. 4.08.)]

EXAMPLE:  A claimant pursued one program under chapter 34 and then switches to a different program under chapter 30.  No change of program will be charged.

**4.09  CONFIRMED ENROLLMENTS**

---

See [Part 4: Chapter 1 - Enrollment Certification](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073421?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), paragraph 1.27a.

**4.10  COOPERATIVE TRAINING**

---

**a.  Background.** Before October 9, 1996, cooperative training had its own special rate.  Effective October 9, 1996, the rate for cooperative training is the same as for full-time institutional training.  (Before Public Law 105-114, category II cooperative cases had a special rate effective October 9, 1996.  However, Public Law 105-114 eliminated this special rate for category II cases.)

        **b.  Monthly Rate Before and After October 9, 1996**

(1)  For cooperative training before October 9, 1996, first determine the BDN‑computed full-time institutional rate.  Then multiply this rate by .8 and round to the nearest penny. Use the "M" override indicator (see [par. 4.16](#416)) on the 312 Award screen to override the BDN-generated rate.

(2)  For cooperative training on or after October 9, 1996, pay the institutional rate for full-time training in all cases.  (If a cooperative award spans October 9, 1996, remove the "M" override indicator on an award line effective October 9, 1996.)

**c.  [Notification.**  For cases with cooperative training which begins on or after October 9, 1996, use training time "4" (full-time) and issue BDN-generated award letters.  BDN will properly determine the rate and entitlement charge.]

**4.11  DEATH BENEFIT** 

---

**SUBSECTION 1: OVERVIEW**

**a.  Eligibility.** A death benefit is payable in certain cases when an individual dies on active duty or within one year of discharge and the death is service-connected. The death benefit is payable to the beneficiaries of:

(1) A Service member who was eligible for chapter 30 at the time of his or her death or would have been eligible except for the length of service requirement, the high school completion requirement, or both, or

(2) A Veteran eligible for chapter 30 who dies after October 28, 1992, if his or her death occurs within one year of his or her discharge or release from active duty.

NOTE: A Veteran or Service member who relinquished chapter 30 benefits to become eligible for chapter 33 benefits, and then dies as defined in paragraph (1) or (2), will still have eligibility to the chapter 30 death benefit for beneficiaries without regard to chapter 33 benefits used.

**b.  Beneficiaries.** The beneficiary(ies) for the chapter 30 death benefit will be the first person, listed as follows, who is surviving on the date of death:

(1) The designated Servicemen's Group Life Insurance (SGLI) beneficiary or beneficiaries, paid based on the percentages listed

(2) The surviving spouse of the individual,

(3) The surviving child or children of the individual, in equal shares, or

(4) The surviving parent or parents of the individual in equal shares.

**c.  Time Limit.** There is no time limit for filing a chapter 30 death claim. However, if accrued benefits are payable, a claim must be filed within one year from the date of death. 

**d.  Benefit Amount.** VA will pay an amount equal to the individual's chapter 30 military pay reduction as shown in the military Finance records. VA will reduce the death benefit by any chapter 30 benefits previously paid or any accrued benefits paid or payable. The death benefit is paid from VA's Readjustment Benefits account rather than from the service department's contribution fund.  The death benefit includes up to the $1200 original pay reduction and the $600 additional contribution.  Some death benefit refunds could total as much as $1800.

**e.  Jurisdiction.**Effective July 2020, the Buffalo Regional Processing Office (RPO) is responsible for processing chapter 30 death benefit refunds.

**f.  Regional Office Support.**   Each Regional Office (RO) has a Casualty Assistance Call Officer (CACO) to assist with interacting with the survivor(s) and serves as a liaison between the survivor(s) and VA. 

The list of CACOs can be found here: <https://vaww.portal2.va.gov/sites/OfficeofFieldOperations/BASinfo/Lists/CoordinatorContacts/By%20Station.aspx>.  The CACO should be able to provide the DD Form 1300.

**SUBSECTION II: PROCESSING PROCEDURES**

**g.  Required Evidence.**   A notice of a Service member’s death may be received from the Department of Defense (DoD), VA Casualty Assistance Call Officers, or family members.

Regardless of the source of the notice, the following is required:

(1) Validate the Service member’s contribution**.** As provided in Part 3, 3.12, the Veterans Information Solution (VIS) is the authoritative source for determining service information.  However, the service departments may not update VIS timely in some instances. If less than a $1,200 pay reduction is shown in VIS (or the additional $600 buy up portion), clarification should be requested through the service department POCs, to obtain current information before processing the claim if there is evidence the Service member served more than 12 months.

In Benefits Delivery Network (BDN), use of the 30D screen may assist in confirming the amount of pay reductions the Service member has made.

(2) Claim Required.  A written claim for the chapter 30 death benefit is required.   However, there is no particular form.  VA will solicit claims whenever appropriate.  VCEs should never develop if there is no payable chapter 30 death benefit. Always validate the amount available before soliciting a claim.

  A. Formal Claim includes a written request, DD Form 1300 or death certificate.

B. Informal Claim may include a DD Form 1300 from a CACO and beneficiary information.  VA must solicit formal claims when notification of an informal has been received.

When soliciting a claim, the VCE should review the SGLI website to determine beneficiaries and percentages when a notice of death has been received for a Service member.  Once beneficiaries have been determined, VCE should send the PCGL Death Dev letter to each person eligible for the benefit and invite them to submit a claim.

All documents must be captured into The Image Management System (TIMS) and no additional control is needed.

Once the claim is received, an End Product Code (EPC) 403 (benefit chapter 30) should be created using the date the written claim was received as the date of claim.

(3) Proof of Death.  The Department of Defense (DoD) uses DD Form 1300 (Report of Casualty) to report in-service deaths.   A DD Form 1300 is not required specifically by law to be presented but it is the preferred evidence in determining whether or not the death occurred within the line of duty (LOD).  There are 4 types of DD Form 1300s.

A. Initial: This report only contains the date of death but not the reason or cause. It can be used to initiate communication to beneficiaries but cannot be used to determine the death was service connected.

B. Interim: This report is usually issued when an investigation is ongoing. It can be used to initiate communication to beneficiaries but cannot be used to determine the death was service connected.

C. Pending: This report is usually issued when there is a status update from Initial or Interim.  However, it is just an update and cannot be used to determine the death was service connected.

D. Final: This report provides all of the information needed to determine cause of death.

VIS will identify a LOD death and show the date of death. The use of this VIS showing LOD in lieu of a final 1300 is acceptable. It must be captured in the TIMS folder.

In the event a Veteran has died within one year of the release from active duty from a service connected disability, a DD Form 1300 will not be issued.  A certified copy of a death certificate is acceptable as proof of death in this situation.

NOTE 1: The Army provides DD Form 1300s of Veterans who have died within 120 days of the Release from Active Duty (RAD) date (REFRAD). 

NOTE 2: In order to determine a Veteran has been rated as service-connected, the VCE should review SHARE for a master record.  If a master record is found, the VCE should review VBMS for a copy of the rating.  The Veteran must have died from a service-connected disability to establish potential eligibility for the chapter 30 death benefit.

(4) Cause of Death. The cause of death will be listed on DD Form 1300 as one of the following:

 A. Illness: This requires verification of service connection.  The service department must make this determination. 

 B. Suicide: This requires a rating by the RO Rating Board. See local procedures to coordinate with the Buffalo Rating Board to decide the rating.

 C. Homicide: This requires a verification of a lack of culpability by the requesting beneficiaries, as applicable.  A beneficiary may not receive the death benefit (any portion of it) if found to be culpable. This is a service department determination.

 D. Killed in Action (KIA): This is reflected as an automatic LOD determination.  LOD determinations may be found on the VIS screen and need no additional development.

NOTE: KIA deaths are to be handled as priority processing.

VA will concede the death is “service connected” unless information on the DD Form 1300 states the death was not in the LOD, or information on the form indicates a LOD is necessary.  In addition, VIS will provide clarification if LOD was required.  When the VCE cannot determine if LOD has been determined, development to the department POC is appropriate.

An LOD determination is necessary if the death is due to homicide, suicide or if drugs or alcohol were (or may be) involved. For example, if the death was due to a gunshot wound and the military shows "in line of duty" on the DD Form 1300, VA can concede the death is service-connected.  This is true even if it is an "interim" DD Form 1300.  If the death is due to gunshot wound and no remarks indicate it was in the line of duty, or the narrative shows "determination pending", VA must contact the service department POC for a line of duty determination. 

If the cause of death is due to an "accident", VA must determine if drugs or alcohol were involved unless the DD Form 1300 states the death was "in line of duty".  If the DD Form 1300 indicates "line of duty", VA (the RPO) can establish the death as service-connected.

**h.  Denials.**  If eligibility to the death benefit is not established, send the PCGL chapter 30 death benefit disallowance letter to the beneficiary(ies) providing a full explanation of the reason for denial and appeal rights.  The VCE must capture the letter into TIMS and is authorized to PCLR the 403 end product at time of decision.

**i.  Eligibility Determined.** When eligibility to the death benefit is established,

(1) Payments will be released using BDN RFND and RAUT commands. VCE must capture all screen into the TIMS folder.

NOTE: Only one fiscal transaction can be entered per beneficiary per day.

* Use the RFND command to create the payment
* Use the RAUT command to authorize the payment.

NOTE: A second person must use the RAUT command to authorize the payment.   

(2) Each beneficiary must receive a PCGL chapter 30 death claim award letter. Capture each letter into the TIMS folder.

(3) After all payments and letters are released the VCE should PCLR the 403 and finish the claim token in TIMS.

Note: VCEs must ensure they review BDN to determine if the Service member or Veteran receive chapter 30 benefits. If so, check the last activity date in BDN. Be sure to subtract the amount of benefits paid to Service member or Veteran before issuing the refund to the beneficiary(ies).

**j.  Reporting.**   At the end of each week, the Buffalo RPO must report to the Executive Management Team: 

(1) the number of claims received during the week

(2) the number of claims paid for the week; and

(3) the number of cases pending

**k. End Product.** Chapter 30 death benefit refunds should be controlled using EPC 403 in BDN.  An EPC 403 should be established at the time the formal claim is received and not cleared until the chapter 30 death benefit has been released.  Multiple 403s are authorized if multiple beneficiaries apply but cannot be in BDN concurrently due to system limitations.  One EPC 403 will control for timeliness. At that time, additional 403s with the correct date of claim may be cleared when additional payments are released.

**4.12  FIRST NOTICE OF DEATH PROCESSING**

---

**a.  Processing FNODs in RPOs.** In some cases, an RPO may receive an FNOD (First Notice of Death).  Apply the following procedures:

(1)  BDN Processing.  Process the FNOD transaction under existing instructions in M21-1, part II, chapter 5.  An FNOD updates a date of death field in the chapter 30 master record.  This field is not displayed on any of the MINQ (Master Record Inquiry) screens.

(2)  Death in Service.  If death was in service, or within one year of the veteran's release from active duty, and the deceased was a category I, III, or IV chapter 30 participant, refer a copy of all documents to Buffalo for consideration of the chapter 30 death benefit and any accrued benefit payable.  [  ]

(3)  Death After Service.  If death was one year or more after service or the deceased was not a category I, III, or IV chapter 30 participant, review the record for possible accrued chapter 30 benefits.  All RPOs are responsible for developing and processing claims for accrued benefits in these cases.

(4)  Referrals to Other Offices.  In all cases, after the above actions, refer the incoming documents to the station with the claims folder or the station with C&P (Compensation and Pension) jurisdiction.  This station will be responsible for developing and processing claims for all benefits except for the chapter 30 death benefit and accrued chapter 30 benefits.

**b.  Processing of FNODs in ROs Other Than RPOs.**  ROs other than RPOs process FNODs per M21-1, part II, paragraph 5.06[.](http://vbaw.vba.va.gov/bl/21/publicat/Manuals/Part2/205.htm#5.06)  Processing an FNOD on a chapter 30 case with a running award will result in the suspension of benefits and generation of an NOE (Notice of Exception) to the RPO.  Upon receipt of the message (6040 PAYEE DECEASED - PROCEEDS ESTABLISHED), the RPO will review the case for potential eligibility.  If the veteran died within one year of his or her release from active duty, contact the RO that processed the FNOD, determine if a claim for death benefits has been received, and request a copy of any rating.  If no claim has been received, process the case according to the procedures in  paragraph [4.11](#411) above.

(1)  Burial or DIC Claim.  If a burial or DIC (Dependency and Indemnity Compensation) claim is received with a request for the death benefit, the RO will send a copy of the rating along with the claim for the death benefit to the Buffalo RPO.

(2)  No Burial or DIC Claim.  If no burial or DIC claim is received, send the request for the death benefit to the Buffalo RPO.  If a memorandum rating is required, it will be done at the Buffalo RPO.  The Buffalo [Education Division will include the finding of the rating in the memorandum authorizing payment which is sent to the Finance activity.]

**c.  Erroneous FNODs.** Sometimes an erroneous FNOD may be processed.  If this happens, an award cannot be processed even though BIRLS (Beneficiary Identification and Records Locator Subsystem) has been corrected [to remove the date of death.  Here is the procedure for removing the erroneous date of death from the chapter 30 record:

(1)  Contact the [Director, Education Service to determine what the date of death is in the chapter 30 record.  (See [PART 01, GENERAL. CHAPTER 1 - OVERVIEW OF THE MANUAL](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000063441?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), par 1.06[.](https://vbaw.vba.va.gov/bl/22/ref/m22-4/Part%20I/ch01.htm#106))

(2)  Do an FNOD transaction with that date of death.

(3)  Update BIRLS to remove the date of death from BIRLS.]

**4.13  EFFECTIVE DATE OF [ORIGINAL] AWARDS**

---

**a.  General.**  Chapter 30 benefits are not payable for any period for which the claimant is not eligible.  [  ]

EXAMPLE:  A veteran is discharged with 23 months of service and meets the requirements for chapter 30.  Eligibility begins on the day after his or her RAD date.  No benefits are payable for any period of training which occurs while the veteran was on active duty since the veteran did not serve 24 months.

*NOTE:  For servicepersons, benefits are not payable for periods of training which occur before the completion of 24 months of service.  Benefits are never payable for apprenticeship or OJT for persons on active duty.*

**b.  Category I.**  The earliest beginning date for category I claimants is July 1, 1985.

**c.  Category II.** The earliest beginning date for category II claimants is January 1, 1990.

**d.  Category III**

(1)  [Category IIIA. The earliest beginning date for category IIIA claimants is the veteran's RAD date, which must be after February 2, 1991.

(2)  Category IIIB.  The earliest beginning date for category IIIB claimants is the veteran's RAD date which must be after October 22, 1992.

(3)  Category IIIC (No Chapter 32 Involved).  The earliest beginning date for category IIIC claimants is the latest of the following:

(i)  The veteran's RAD date which must be before October 23, 1992;

(ii)  The date of election which must be before October 23, 1993; or

(iii)  The date of payment of $1,200 which has no time limit.  (See [38 CFR 21.7032](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17032).)

[**e.  Category IV**

(1)  Category IVA.  The earliest beginning date for category IVA claimants is the date of election, which must be a date during the one year open season beginning on October 9, 1996.

(2)  Category IVB.  The earliest beginning date for category IVB claimants is the date of election, which must be a date during the one year open season beginning on October 9, 1996.

(3)  Category IVC.  The earliest beginning date for category IVC claimants is the date of election, which must be a date during the one year open season ending on October 31, 2001.  (Collection of $2,700 is an eligibility requirement and must be collected before chapter 30 benefits can be paid.)]

**4.14  LUMP SUM AWARD ADJUSTMENTS**

---

BDN will not allow an amended or combination stop/reentrance award when trying to adjust a lump sum award.  Use the procedures in this paragraph whenever adjusting a lump-sum award.  See  chapter 2, subchapter IV, for routine lump sum award procedures.

**a.  DLC/DLP.**  Lump-sum award processing sets the DLC and DLP (Date Last Paid) to the end of the lump-sum award period.  An amended or combination stop/reentrance award does not adjust DLC or DLP.  If it is necessary to adjust the current award and the DLC and DLP are in the future, an award adjustment would not back up DLC and DLP.  This would result in a processing problem if the adjustment changed training time to one-half time or more.

**b.  Adjustment to Current Award Period--No-Pay Date in the Future.**  If the current award is a lump-sum and the no-pay date is after the current date, four actions are required:

(1)  Process a stop effective on the beginning date of the lump-sum award and suppress the BDN-generated award letter.

(2)  Send the case to the Finance activity to change the collection code indicator from a "1" to a "3".  This change allows BDN to collect the overpayment created by the stop from the next award action.

(3)  Prepare a reentrance award with the new information.  If the no-pay date of the new award period is in the future and the training time on each award line is for less than 1/2 time, process the award as a lump-sum.  If the award period is in the past or does not qualify for a lump-sum payment, process the award as a regular reentrance award with certification data.

(4)  Suppress the BDN-generated award letter and prepare a locally produced letter explaining the actions taken.

**c.  Adjustment to Current Award Period--No-Pay Date in the Past.**  If the no-pay date for the last award line is before the current date, amend the previous award in the normal manner.  Do not use the "L" override indicator to amend a previous lump-sum award if the no-pay date is before the current date.

**d.  Adjustment to Earlier Award Period.**  Sometimes it is necessary to adjust an award period before the current lump-sum award.  A current lump-sum award period is one in which the no pay date is after the current date.  To adjust an award before a lump-sum award, use the following procedure:

(1)  Process a stop effective on the beginning date of the lump-sum award and suppress the BDN-generated award letter.

(2)  Send the case to the Finance activity to change the collection code indicator from a "1" to a "3".  This change allows BDN to collect the overpayment created by the stop from the next award action.

(3)  Process an amended award to adjust the earlier award period.  Suppress the BDN-generated award letter.  If the amended award increases the overpayment, send the case back to the Finance activity to change the collection indicator from "1" to "3".

**4.15  MANUAL ENTITLEMENT COMPUTATIONS**

---

 *NOTE:  For other entitlement issues, see paragraphs [4.07](#407), [4.21, 4.22, and 4.23](#421).*

BDN computes remaining entitlement after an award is authorized and includes this data in the claimant's award letter and in the master record.  The Chapter 30 PC Payment System, described in subchapter IV, computes entitlement remaining and updates the entitlement fields in BDN after each payment is made.  Occasionally, manual calculations may be necessary.  For example, manual calculations are necessary to project the entitlement remaining at the end of an apprenticeship or OJT program if this information is needed for award letter purposes.

**a.  Institutional Training.**  To compute entitlement manually, use the tables shown in part IV, paragraph 14.05[.](https://vbaw.vba.va.gov/bl/22/ref/m22-4/Part%20IV/ch14.htm#1405)

*NOTE:  For entitlement purposes, all months are considered to be 30 days in length.*

**b.  Apprenticeship/OJT** 

(1)  Chapter 30--Not Category II**.** Apply the rules given in paragraph 1.20g(2).  If the student trains less than 120 hours for a full month of training, reduce payment and corresponding entitlement charge according to the table given in part VII, paragraph 4.15e.

(2)  Chapter 30--Category II**.** Compute the chapter 30 entitlement as described in subparagraph a above.  Compute chapter 34 entitlement separately at the rate of 1 month for each month in which the claimant works 120 hours, regardless of step.  Reduce the chapter 34 entitlement charge proportionately as described in [the table in part VII, paragraph 4.15e] if the veteran works less than 120 hours per month.  If chapter 34 entitlement is exhausted before chapter 30 entitlement, pay the remaining chapter 30 entitlement at the category IB rate.

*NOTE 1:  Original entitlement is established in BDN when the type I master record is established.  See paragraph 2.08b.  Entitlement in BDN is updated as payments are issued.*

*NOTE 2: Claims examiners should enter the full length of the apprenticeship or other OJT program in the Chapter 30 PC Payment System.  Do not try to project a date on which entitlement will be exhausted because it is impossible to determine that date with certainty.  If the claim examiner enters a projected entitlement exhaustion date in the Chapter 30 PC Payment System, the veteran may be underpaid.  For the original award letter, the claims examiner should project an ending date (using manual calculations or a local spreadsheet) but advise the veteran that this date is subject to change depending on the number of hours worked.*

**c.  Correspondence and Flight.**  For manual calculation of correspondence and flight entitlement, see paragraphs 1.20g(3) and (5).

**d.  Cooperative Training.**  For manual calculation of cooperative training entitlement, see paragraph [4.10b](#410b).

**4.16  OVERRIDE INDICATOR ON BDN AWARD LINES**

---

**a.  Incorrect Computer-Generated Rate.**  Enter "M" (or "I" for independent study or" J" for incarceration) in the OR (Override) indicator field of the 312 (Education Award) screen if the monthly rate that would otherwise be generated will be incorrect.  For example, the individual may be due a kicker, but the system does not reflect a kicker payable.  Calculate the monthly rate manually and enter it on an award line using override code "M."  See paragraph2.19c regarding the "L" override indicator.  [  ]

**b.  Signature Requirement and Kicker Accounting.**  A rate entered with an override code has no upper or lower limit; therefore, two signatures are required for such an award.  In addition, when the "M" override is used, all benefits paid from that award are considered as basic benefits.  This means that the DOD is not billed for any kicker benefits payable from that award line.

**c.  Removal of "M" Override Indicator.** Sometimes on subsequent case review, it will be apparent that the M override indicator is unnecessary because BDN can generate the correct rate. If so, the [claims examiner] should remove all unnecessary M override indicators.  In some cases it may be necessary to regenerate multiple award lines.

**d.  Periodic Review.**  Periodically, Hines [BDC] may generate a listing of cases where an M override indicator was used within the past year.  The RPOs should review these listings to determine if these "M" overrides are still needed.  If an "M" override is not needed, apply the procedure in [subparagraph c](#416c) above.

**4.17  REFUNDS**

---

**a.  Category I**.  As noted in paragraph 1.16, there is no provision for refund of pay reductions.  If a claim for refund is received, use a locally produced letter to explain the denial of the refund.  If pay reductions appear to have been withheld in error (e.g., the person entered active duty before July 1, 1985), refer the case to the DOD program manager for review.  See paragraph [4.11](#411) in death cases.

*NOTE:  Some claimants have completed a VA Form 5281, Application for Refund of Educational Contributions, to request a refund.  This application is for refund of contributions to chapter 32.  If the claimant was a chapter 32 participant, see paragraph 3.19.*

**b.  Category II.**  Payments by the veteran are not required to be eligible for benefits under category II.  Therefore, no refund from VA is possible.

**c.  Category III**

(1)  Category IIIA and Category IIIB.  The no refund of pay reduction provision of paragraph 1.16 applies to category IIIA and category IIIB, as well as category I cases.

(2)  Category IIIC.  Finance will refund the $1,200 payment if the Education Division] determines that the veteran failed to submit a valid election before October 23, 1993, or does not meet the basic eligibility requirements for election.

(i.)  [The Education Division] will notify Finance with a memorandum giving the reason(s) for the refund, the claimant's name, claim number, and address of record.

(ii.)  Finance will send the veteran a letter that explains the reason for the refund, and details the veteran's appellate rights.

**d.  Category IV.** Refunds are permitted in cases where [the Education Division determines that VA accepted the election in error.]  They are also permitted in category IVB cases if an individual revokes a chapter 30 election. 

**4.18  [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]**

---

 **4.19  [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]**

---

 **SUBCHAPTER III.  CATEGORY II ISSUES**

**4.20  [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]**

---

 **4.21  BUY BACK OF CHAPTER 34 ENTITLEMENT**

---

*NOTE:  For other entitlement issues, see paragraphs [4.07](#407), [4.15](#415), [4.22, and 4.23.](#422)*

A claimant who has exhausted all chapter 34 entitlement before December 31, 1989, cannot buy back chapter 34 entitlement to be eligible for chapter 30 benefits.  A buy back can only be used to buy another term of chapter 34 benefits.

**4.22  CHANGES TO CHAPTER 34 REMAINING ENTITLEMENT**

---

*NOTE:  For other entitlement issues, see paragraphs [4.07](#407), [4.15](#415), [4.21, and 4.23](#421).*

**a.  Retroactive Adjustments to Chapter 34 Awards.**  When a retroactive adjustment to the chapter 34 master record is processed, the 30D screen is updated with the new chapter 34 remaining entitlement.  This update occurs simultaneously with the DMDC updates to the 30D screen.

**b.  M22 Screen Update.**  In addition, the transaction history is updated with transaction "C34."  When the next award is processed, [BDN will require the claims examiner to go] back to the 310 screen and the message CHANGE IN CH34 TRANSF ENT - 310 REQUIRED will be displayed.

**c.  Special NOE Message.**  If an increase in the amount of benefits payable is due, NOE message 6005 will be generated.  If a potential overpayment exists, the NOE message will be generated and the master record suspended.

(1)  If the amount of remaining entitlement is increased and the master record indicates that the amount of transferred chapter 34 entitlement has been exhausted in the master record (the master record contains a beginning reason of 30), the [claims examiner] should process an amended award with a beginning date before the date corresponding to the 30 beginning reason.  BDN award processing will recalculate the rates payable based on the increase in chapter 34 transferred entitlement.

(2)  If the amount of remaining entitlement is increased but the master record indicates that the chapter 34 transferred entitlement is not yet exhausted, the next time an award is processed the increased chapter 34 transferred entitlement will be reflected in the master record.

(3)  If the amount of remaining chapter 34 entitlement is decreased and the chapter 34 transferred entitlement in the master record has been exhausted, the master record will be suspended.  Process an amended award with a beginning date earlier than the date corresponding to the reason 30 beginning date.  BDN will recalculate the amount of benefits payable based on the reduced amount of chapter 34 transferred entitlement.

(4)  If the amount of chapter 34 entitlement is decreased but chapter 34 transferred entitlement has not been exhausted in the master record, the transaction history will be updated with "C34" only.  The next time an award is processed, the decreased chapter 34 transferred entitlement will be reflected in the master record.

**4.23  CHAPTER 34 AWARD ADJUSTMENTS--EFFECT ON CHAPTER 30**

---

If it is necessary to adjust a chapter 34 record, examine the effect of this adjustment on the original entitlement under chapter 30.  If there will be any change in the chapter 30 original entitlement, process a chapter 30 award (or C/E) to inform the claimant of the revised entitlement.  Follow these specific procedures when it appears the chapter 30 entitlement will be affected.

**a.  Continue Control of Chapter 30 Claim**.  [Suspend the claimant's electronic record] until the chapter 34 award updates the chapter 34 BDN record and the revised entitlement transfers to the BDN 30D screen.

**b.  Amended Chapter 30 Award.**  When the 30D screen updates, process a new chapter 30 award or C/E.  BDN will require completion of the 310 screen to recompute chapter 30 entitlement in these cases.

*NOTE:  The 30D screen update referred to above may fail to occur in certain cases.  If so, make the appropriate entries on the BDN 310 screen, as described in paragraph 2.07, to ensure that BDN correctly computes original chapter 30 entitlement.*

EXAMPLE 1:  The veteran had used 6 months of entitlement under chapter 34 at the time he received a chapter 30 C/E.  The initial chapter 30 award letter showed original chapter 30 entitlement to be 36 months.  Now, a chapter 34 award for 3 additional months of training at full-time must be processed.

ACTION:  There is no need to make any adjustment to the chapter 30 award because there is no change to original entitlement under chapter 30.

EXAMPLE 2:  Same facts as example 1 except that the chapter 30 record must be adjusted at the same time because of a change in training time.

ACTION:  Process the chapter 30 award immediately after the chapter 34 award.  There is no reason to delay processing because chapter 30 entitlement will not change as the result of the chapter 34 action.

EXAMPLE 3:  At the time the chapter 30 C/E was issued, the veteran had used 12 months of entitlement under chapter 34.  The original chapter 30 entitlement, therefore, was shown as 36 months on the C/E.  Now, it is necessary to adjust the chapter 34 record to pay for 2 additional months of training at full-time.

ACTION:  Diary the case so it will be reviewed after the chapter 34 master record in BDN has been updated and the revised entitlement has been transferred to the BDN 30D screen record.  When the diary matures, issue a new C/E under chapter 30.  The new C/E should show the original chapter 30 entitlement as 34 months.

**4.24  DEPENDENCY**

---

Apply the principles in partIV, chapter 9.  

**a.  Ratings for Helpless Children.**  The RO with C&P jurisdiction over the area in which the veteran lives will do any ratings that are needed.  See paragraph 3.04, regarding disability ratings.

**b.  Apportionments.**  Apportionments are not payable under [chapter 30].

**4.25  [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]**

---

**SUBCHAPTER IV.  PROCEDURES FOR OJT/APPRENTICESHIP, CORRESPONDENCE, AND FLIGHT AWARDS**

**4.26  [CHAPTER 30] PC PAYMENT SYSTEM**

---

**a.  Background**.  The [Chapter 30 PC Payment System processes chapter 30 benefits for pursuit of training in OJT/apprenticeship, correspondence, or flight programs.  This subchapter provides an overview only.  Detailed procedures are contained in the "Systems Training Guide:—Chapter 30 PC Application Phase II," published separately.

**b.  Capabilities**

(1)  This payment system provides a variety of stand-alone capabilities which include:

(i) Award and certification processing.

(ii)  GAP (Generate And Print) and CAUT (Claims AUThorization) processing.

(iii) Fiscal processing.

(iv) Accounts receivable maintenance.

(v) Audit trail.

(vi) Fiscal and award report generation.

(vii)  Master record maintenance processing.

(viii)  Certification forms and delinquent certification letters processing.

(ix)  Compliance survey forms generation.

(2)  This payment system also provides the capability to send payment, accounting, and entitlement data via telecommunication lines to the [chapter 30] [BDN] system where either an "I" type master record (for new or original [chapter 30] claims) or an "E" type master record (for reentry or supplemental claims) exists.  The data will generate payment, update the PHF (Payment History File), which is also available through the [BDN] TINQ (Treasury INQuiry) command, and update entitlement fields.  This process will allow for the generation of accounting data since the Chapter 30 PC Payment System does not include an accounting subsystem.

**4.27  FINANCE ACTIVITIES**

---

**a.  Daily Activities.**  Daily activity involves the input of award data, certification data, and adjustments to beneficiary accounts using the fiscal processing functions.  [The Education Division will enter awards.  Depending on local conditions (accessibility of the Chapter 30 PC Payment System or network), hard copy awards (VA Forms 22-1992, Authorization for Certificate of Eligibility or Disallowance and 22-1997, Education Award) may no longer be necessary.  The chapter 30 PC Payment System will generate an award print which contains all necessary award, certification, and payment information.  This generated award will be filed in the chapter 30 folder and should be used instead of VA Forms 22‑1992 and 22‑1997.  Daily activities also include the performance of End of Day processing and system maintenance.  The End of Day processing includes transferring payments, charges of entitlement, and accounting transactions to BDN] each Monday, Wednesday, and Friday.

*NOTE:  Finance does not need to establish separate payment history folders on new cases.*

***b.  Periodic activities.**  [Periodic activities] involve the transfer of payment, entitlement, and accounting data and the generation of reports.  The payment file is generated at the RPO and transferred via telecommunication lines to the BDN system for payment, update, and inclusion in the PHF.  The payment file is generated to coincide with the processing of the BDN chapter 30] accounting cycle.  Reports are generated during each Chapter 30 PC Payment System processing cycle (usually once a day) at each RPO.  The detailed report will summarize and classify payment, accounts receivable, proceeds, and accounting data to the Finance activity.*

**4.28  [EDUCATION DIVISION] ACTIVITIES**

---

**a.  Initial Award Processing.**  [The Education Division is responsible for processing original and reopened claims.  The claims examiner determines eligibility, and uses BDN to create an "I" type Master Record (M/R) for original chapter 30 award processing.  If the award being processed on the Chapter 30 PC Payment System is a reentrance award, the existing "E" type M/R will suffice.  An award may be processed on the PC system only after a M/R is established in the BDN] system.

*NOTE:  Failure to have  an "I" or "E" type master record established will cause the Chapter 30 PC Payment System transmission to reject.  [BDN] will issue a reject message to the RPO for corrective action.*

**b.  Other Award Processing.**  Changes to an award (amend, resume, stop, etc.) are also the responsibility of the [Education] Division.

**4.29  LETTERS**

---

The [Chapter 30 PC Payment System] does not generate award or overpayment letters.  Each RPO is responsible for producing these letters outside the this payment system.  This payment system, on the other hand, does provide the Finance activities with the capability to produce three demand overpayment notifications.

**4.30  COMPARISON TO OTHER OUT-OF-SYSTEM AWARD PROCESSING**

---

There are several similarities to manual award processing as outlined in part IV, chapter 12, and also several differences.  The principle difference between the Chapter 30 PC Payment System and [Out-Of-System Award Processing is that the Chapter 30 payment system award tearsheets contain significant amounts of finance and certification of attendance information.  The basic award fields, including file number, award type, and award line data appear on both types of awards.  The award tearsheets show school data, certification of attendance data, hours worked per month data, correspondence lessons completed, and dual, solo, post, ground, and other flight hours.  A great many functions are automated:  rates, automatic reductions when chapter 34] entitlement is exhausted, etc.  Compare the examples of each tearsheet which follows with the instructions for completing VA Form 22-1997 in part IV, chapter 12[.](https://vbaw.vba.va.gov/bl/22/ref/m22-4/Part%20IV/ch12.htm)

 

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| PAGE 1 | | | | | | | | | | APP AWARD | | | | | | | | | | | 06/17/1993 | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| FILE NUMBER 006656339  00 | | | | | | AWARD KEY:  20000117 | | | | | | | | | | CH30 APP | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| BEGIN DATE 07/01/1992 | | | | | RSN 00 END DATE 06/01/1994 | | | | | | | | | | | FACILITY 1-0-A111-11 | | | | | | | |
| COURSE 372 | | | | | OBJECTIVE 372    STEP 1 | | | | | | | | | | | ELAPSED TIME  1  0 | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| A R JORDAN | YEAR | | JAN | FEB | | | MAR | | APR | | MAY | | JUN | JUL | AUG | | | SEP | | OCT | | NOV | DEC |
| 1 BULL COURT |  | |  |  | | |  | |  | |  | |  |  |  | | |  | |  | |  |  |
| #121 |  | |  |  | | |  | |  | |  | |  |  |  | | |  | |  | |  |  |
| CHICAGO |  | |  |  | | |  | |  | |  | |  |  |  | | |  | |  | |  |  |
| IL |  | |  |  | | |  | |  | |  | |  |  |  | | |  | |  | |  |  |
| 606022236 |  | |  |  | | |  | |  | |  | |  |  |  | | |  | |  | |  |  |
| AGENT CASH |  | |  |  | | |  | |  | |  | |  |  |  | | |  | |  | |  |  |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| ENTITLEMENT CHARGED:   0.000000 | | | | | | | | LAST CERT:    /  / | | | | | | | | | AUTHORIZED:  0.00 | | | | | | |
| GAPPED BY:  PJM | | CAUTED BY: | | | | | | | | | | EXTENSION:   0.00 | | | | | | | CATEGORY: 1I | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

 

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| BEGIN DATE | NONE DATE | HRS | RATE | DEP | AUTH | CH30 | CH34 | STEP |
| 07/01/1992 | 12/02/1992 | 0 | 365.25 | 0 | 0.00 | 0.000000 | 0.000000 | 1 |
| 12/02/1992 | 04/01/1993 | 0 | 248.88 | 0 | 0.00 | 0.000000 | 0.000000 | 2 |
| 04/01/1993 | 06/02/1993 | 0 | 276.38 | 0 | 0.00 | 0.000000 | 0.000000 | 2 |
| 06/02/1993 | 12/02/1993 | 0 | 163.80 | 0 | 0.00 | 0.000000 | 0.000000 | 3 |
| 12/02/1993 | 06/01/1994 | 0 | 151.90 | 0 | 0.00 | 0.000000 | 0.000000 | 4 |

**Figure 4.01.  PC System Apprenticeship Award Tearsheet**

---

 

|  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| PAGE 2 | | APP AWARD | | 06/17/1993 |
|  | | | | |
| FILE NUMBER 006656339  00 | AWARD KEY:  20000117 | | CH30 APP | |
|  |  |  |  |  |

 

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| ORIGINAL 30 | | | | | 36  0 | | | FISCAL 30 | | | | 0 | | 0 | CATEGORY II | | | | | KICKER | | | 0.00 |
| ORIGINAL 34 | | | | | 33 14 | | | FISCAL 34 | | | | 0 | | 0 | AUTHORIZED  0.00 | | | | | | EXT | | 0.00 |
| TYPE CERTED | | AUTHD | | | | CH30 | | | | CH34 | | DP/CAT | | | | AUTHORZD | | | CH30 | | | CH34 | |
| CH FISCAL | |  | | | | 0.00000 | | | | 0.00000 | | / | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00000 | | | 0.00000 | |
| 1 APP 20000117 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | 0.00000 | | II | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00000 | | | 0.00000 | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| + FLIGHT AMOUNTS CHARGED .............. | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00000 | | | 0.00000 | |
| + CORRESPONDENCE AMOUNTS CHARGED ...... | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00000 | | | 0.00000 | |
| + OJT AMOUNTS CHARGED ................. | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00000 | | | 0.00000 | |
| + APP AMOUNTS CHARGED  ................ | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00000 | | | 0.00000 | |
| + EXTENSION AMOUNTS CHARGED............ | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00000 | | | 0.00000 | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| = AWARD/CERT TOTALS | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | 0.00000 | |  | | | | 0.00 | | |  | | |  | |
| - EXTENSION ADJUST | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | 0.00000 | |  | | | |  | | | 0.00000 | | | 0.00000 | |
| - M/R TOTALS | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | 0.00000 | |  | | | | 0.00 | | |  | | |  | |
| - OLD EXT ADJUST | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | 0.00000 | |  | | | |  | | | 0.00000 | | | 0.00000 | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| = AWARD TRANSACTION TOTAL.............. | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00000 | | | 0.00000 | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | PROCEEDS | | | | A/R | | BENE | | | | ------- SUMMARY FIELDS ----- | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | |  | | | |  | | AUTH | | | | PROCEEDS | | | A/R | | | CHECK | |
| M/R Totals........ | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | |
| Bene Authorized... | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | |
| Apply Proceeds (#1) | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | |
| Apply Bene Auth ( ) | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | |
| Less than $5.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | |
| Apply Proceeds (#2) | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | |
| Release Proceeds | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| Proceeds Applied = | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | -M/R Totals .. | | | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | |
| Bene Auth Applied | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | =Net Charge .. | | | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| TX | PROC 59B | | A/R | | | | AUTHORIZE | | | | LT$5 | | CHECK | | | | CH30 | CH34 | | | -- EXT -- | | |
| ADD | 0.00 | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | | 0  0 |
| OLD COMMENTS | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | |  | | | |  |  | | |  | |  |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| AUTHORIZED: | | | | YES | | | | | BY:  PATTEY J MASSON ON 06/17/1993 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| NEW COMMENTS: | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

**Figure 4.01.  PC System Apprenticeship Award Tearsheet (Continued)**

 

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| PAGE 1 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | CORRESPONDENCE AWARD | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 06/21/1993 | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| FILE NUMBER 996962438  00 | | | | | | | | | | | AWARD KEY:  220009999 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | CH30 CORRESPONDENCE | | | | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| BEGIN DATE 03/01/1993 | | | | | | | | | BEGIN RSN 00 | | | | | | | | | | | | | FACILITY 2-5-9384-25 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| COURSE 211 | | | | | | | | | OBJECTIVE 211 | | | | | | | | | | | | | COST  2790.00 | | | | | | | | | | | | 55% COST  1534.5 | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | |  | | | | | | |  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  |
| MICHAEL TEESE | | | | | | AGENT | | | | | | | TOTAL LESSON 20 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  |
| 15TH AND WALNUT | | | | | | CASHIER | | | | | | | NONREIMBURSE  0 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  |
| ST LOUIS MO | | | | | |  | | | | | | |  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  |
| 63013 | | | | | |  | | | | | | |  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  |
|  | | | | | |  | | | | | | |  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  |
|  | | | | | |  | | | | | | |  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| ENTITLEMENT CHARGED:   0.000000 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | LAST CERT:    /  / | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | AUTHORIZED:  0.00 | | | | | | | | |
| GAPPED BY:  BFK | | | | | CAUTED BY: | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | EXTENSION:   0.00 | | | | | | | | | | | | | CATEGORY: 1I | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| ORIGINAL 30 | | | | | 36  0 | | | | | | | FISCAL 30 | | | | | | | | | 0 | | | 0 | CATEGORY II | | | | | | | | | | KICKER | | | 0.00 | |
| ORIGINAL 34 | | | | | 33 14 | | | | | | | FISCAL 34 | | | | | | | | | 0 | | | 0 | AUTHORIZED  0.00 | | | | | | | | | | | EXT | | 0.00 | |
| ----------------EXISTING AWARDS----------------- | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | -------TOTALS------- | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| TYPE | | CERTED | AUTHD | | | | | | | CH30 | | | | | | | | CH34 | | | | | DP  /CAT | | | | AUTHOR | | | | | CH30 | | | | | CH34 | | |
| CH30 | | FISCAL |  | | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | |  | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | 0.00000 | | |
| 1>COR | | 22000999 | 0.00 | | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | II | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | 0.00000 | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| + FLIGHT AMOUNTS CHARGED .............. | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | 0.00000 | | |
| + CORRESPONDENCE AMOUNTS CHARGED ...... | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | 0.00000 | | |
| + OJT AMOUNTS CHARGED ................. | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | 0.00000 | | |
| + APP AMOUNTS CHARGED  ................ | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | 0.00000 | | |
| + EXTENSION AMOUNTS CHARGED............ | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | 0.00000 | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| = AWARD/CERT TOTALS | | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | |  | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | |  | | | | |  | | |
| - EXTENSION ADJUST | | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | |  | | | | |  | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | 0.00000 | | |
| - M/R TOTALS | | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | |  | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | |  | | | | |  | | |
| - OLD EXT ADJUST | | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | |  | | | | |  | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | 0.00000 | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| = AWARD TRANSACTION TOTAL.............. | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | 0.00000 | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | PROCEEDS | | | | | | | | A/R | | | | | | BENE | | | | | ------- SUMMARY FIELDS ----- | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | |  | | | | | | | |  | | | | | | AUTH | | | | | PROCEEDS | | | | | | A/R | | | | | CHECK | | |
| M/R Totals........ | | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | |
| Bene Authorized... | | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | |
| Apply Proceeds (#1) | | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | |
| Apply Bene Auth ( ) | | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | |
| Less than $5.00 | | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | |
| Apply Proceeds (#2) | | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | |
| Release Proceeds | | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| Proceeds Applied = | | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | | | -M/R Totals .. | | | | | | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | |
| Bene Auth Applied | | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | | | =Net Charge .. | | | | | | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| TX | PROC 59B | | A/R | | | | | AUTHORIZE | | | | | | | | | LT$5 | | | | | CHECK | | | | | | CH30 | | CH34 | | | | | | -- EXT -- | | | |
| ADD | 0.00 | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | 0  0 | |
| OLD COMMENTS | | |  | | | | |  | | | | | | | | |  | | | | |  | | | | | |  | |  | | | | | |  | |  | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| AUTHORIZED: | | | | YES | | | | | | | | | | BY:  BILL F KLULESS ON 06/21/1993 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| NEW COMMENTS: | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

**Figure 4.02.  PC Correspondence Award Tearsheet**

---

 

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| PAGE 1 | | | | | | | FLIGHT AWARD | | | | | | | | | | | 06/21/1993 | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| FILE NUMBER 996962438  00 | | | | AWARD KEY:  220009999 | | | | | | | | | CH30 FLIGHT | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| BEGIN DATE 03/01/1993 | | | BEGIN RSN 00 | | | | | | | FACILITY 2-5-9384-25 | | | | | | | | | | |
| COURSE 211 | | | OBJECTIVE 211 | | | | | | | COST  2790.00 | | | | | | 55% COST  1534.5 | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  |  | | | |  | | | DUAL | | | SOLO | PRE/POST | | | | | GROUND | | OTHER |  |
| REDD BARRONS | AGENT | | | | AUTHORIZE | | | 24 | | | 0 | 6 | | | | | 53 | | 0 |  |
| 12 MANFRED RD | CASHIER | | | | NON-REIMB | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | 0.00 |  |
| RICHTOFEN, NJ |  | | | | USED | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | 0.00 |  |
| 08080 |  | | | | REMAINING | | | 24.00 | | | 0.00 | 6.00 | | | | | 53.00 | | 0.00 |  |
|  |  | | | |  | | |  | | |  |  | | | | |  | |  |  |
|  |  | | | |  | | |  | | |  |  | | | | |  | |  |  |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| ENTITLEMENT CHARGED:   0.000000 | | | | | | LAST CERT:    /  / | | | | | | | | AUTHORIZED:  0.00 | | | | | | |
| GAPPED BY:  JCH | | CAUTED BY: | | | | | | | EXTENSION:   0.00 | | | | | | CATEGORY: 1I | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

 

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| ORIGINAL 30 | | | | | 36  0 | | | FISCAL 30 | | | | 0 | | 0 | CATEGORY II | | | | | KICKER | | | 0.00 |
| ORIGINAL 34 | | | | | 33 14 | | | FISCAL 34 | | | | 0 | | 0 | AUTHORIZED  0.00 | | | | | | EXT | | 0.00 |
| ----------------EXISTING AWARDS----------------- | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | -------TOTALS------- | | | | | | | |
| TYPE CERTED | | AUTHD | | | | CH30 | | | | CH34 | | DP/CAT | | | | AUTHORZD | | | CH30 | | | CH34 | |
| CH FISCAL | |  | | | | 0.00000 | | | | 0.00000 | | / | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00000 | | | 0.00000 | |
| 1>FLT 20002000 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | 0.00000 | | II | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00000 | | | 0.00000 | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| + FLIGHT AMOUNTS CHARGED .............. | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00000 | | | 0.00000 | |
| + CORRESPONDENCE AMOUNTS CHARGED ...... | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00000 | | | 0.00000 | |
| + OJT AMOUNTS CHARGED ................. | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00000 | | | 0.00000 | |
| + APP AMOUNTS CHARGED  ................ | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00000 | | | 0.00000 | |
| + EXTENSION AMOUNTS CHARGED............ | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00000 | | | 0.00000 | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| = AWARD/CERT TOTALS | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | 0.00000 | |  | | | | 0.00 | | |  | | |  | |
| - EXTENSION ADJUST | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | 0.00000 | |  | | | |  | | | 0.00000 | | | 0.00000 | |
| - M/R TOTALS | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | 0.00000 | |  | | | | 0.00 | | |  | | |  | |
| - OLD EXT ADJUST | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | 0.00000 | |  | | | |  | | | 0.00000 | | | 0.00000 | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| = AWARD TRANSACTION TOTAL.............. | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00000 | | | 0.00000 | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | PROCEEDS | | | | A/R | | BENE | | | | ------- SUMMARY FIELDS ----- | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | |  | | | |  | | AUTH | | | | PROCEEDS | | | A/R | | | CHECK | |
| M/R Totals........ | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | |
| Bene Authorized... | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | |
| Apply Proceeds (#1) | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | |
| Apply Bene Auth ( ) | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | |
| Less than $5.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | |
| Apply Proceeds (#2) | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | |
| Release Proceeds | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| Proceeds Applied = | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | -M/R Totals .. | | | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | |
| Bene Auth Applied | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | =Net Charge .. | | | | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| TX | PROC 59B | | A/R | | | | AUTHORIZE | | | | LT$5 | | CHECK | | | | CH30 | CH34 | | | -- EXT -- | | |
| ADD | 0.00 | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | | 0  0 |
| OLD COMMENTS | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | |  | | | |  |  | | |  | |  |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| AUTHORIZED: | | | | YES | | | | | BY:  JOY C HARTTHROB ON 06/21/1993 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| NEW COMMENTS: | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

**Figure 4.03.  PC Flight Award Tearsheet**

---

 

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| PAGE 1 | | | | | | | | | | OJT AWARD | | | | | | | | | | | 06/17/1993 | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| FILE NUMBER 982222222  00 | | | | | | AWARD KEY:  10000117 | | | | | | | | | | CH30 OJT | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| BEGIN DATE 01/01/1991 | | | | | RSN 00 END DATE 01/01/1993 | | | | | | | | | | | FACILITY 1-0-1111-11 | | | | | | | |
| COURSE 333 | | | | | OBJECTIVE 444    STEP 1 | | | | | | | | | | | ELAPSED TIME  0  0 | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| G VIABLE | YEAR | | JAN | FEB | | | MAR | | APR | | MAY | | JUN | JUL | AUG | | | SEP | | OCT | | NOV | DEC |
| 810 VERMONT | 1991 | | 120 | 120 | | | 120 | | 120 | | 120 | | 120 | 120 | 120 | | | 120 | | 120 | | 120 | 120 |
| APT 3G | 1992 | | 120 | 120 | | | 120 | | 120 | | 120 | | 120 | 120 | 120 | | | 120 | | 120 | | 120 | 120 |
| SILVER CITY |  | |  |  | | |  | |  | |  | |  |  |  | | |  | |  | |  |  |
| MD |  | |  |  | | |  | |  | |  | |  |  |  | | |  | |  | |  |  |
| 261022236 |  | |  |  | | |  | |  | |  | |  |  |  | | |  | |  | |  |  |
| AGENT CASH N |  | |  |  | | |  | |  | |  | |  |  |  | | |  | |  | |  |  |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| ENTITLEMENT CHARGED:  12.0000 | | | | | | | | LAST CERT:  12/31/1992 | | | | | | | | | AUTHORIZED: 3892.02 | | | | | | |
| GAPPED BY:  DJU | | CAUTED BY: | | | | | | | | | | EXTENSION:   0.00 | | | | | | | CATEGORY: 1B | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

 

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| BEGIN DATE | NONE DATE | HRS | RATE | DEP | AUTH | CH30 | CH34 | ST |
| 01/01/1991 | 07/01/1991 | 720 | 225.00 | 0 | 1350.00 | 4.50000 | 0.000000 | 1 |
| 07/01/1991 | 10/01/1991 | 360 | 165.00 | 0 | 495.00 | 1.65000 | 0.000000 | 2 |
| 10/01/1991 | 01/01/1992 | 360 | 192.50 | 0 | 577.50 | 1.65000 | 0.000000 | 2 |
| 01/01/1992 | 01/01/1993 | 1440 | 122.50 | 0 | 1470.00 | 4.20000 | 0.000000 | 3 |

**Figure 4.04.  PC Amended On-the Job Training Award Tearsheet**

---

 

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| PAGE 2 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | OJT AWARD | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 06/17/1993 | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| FILE NUMBER 982222222  00 | | | | | | | | | | AWARD KEY:  10000117 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | CH30 OJT | | | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| ORIGINAL 30 | | | 36  0 | | | | | FISCAL 30 | | | | | | 0 | | 0 | | | CATEGORY IB | | | | | | | | KICKER | | | | | | 0.00 |
| ORIGINAL 34 | | | 0  0 | | | | | FISCAL 34 | | | | | | 0 | | 0 | | | AUTHORIZED 13043.33 | | | | | | | | | EXT | | | | 980.00 | |
| ----------------EXISTING AWARDS----------------- | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | -------TOTALS------- | | | | | | | | | | | |
| TYPE | | CERTED | | AUTHD | | | | | CH30 | | | | | CH34 | | | | | | DP  /CAT | | AUTHOR | | | | CH30 | | | | | CH34 | | |
| CH30 | | FISCAL | |  | | | | |  | | | | |  | | | | | |  | |  | | | |  | | | | |  | | |
| 1.COR | | 10000118 | | 1375.00 | | | | | 4.58333 | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | | IB | | 1375.00 | | | | 4.58333 | | | | | 0.00000 | | |
| 2>OJT | | 10000117 | | 3892.50 | | | | | 12.00000 | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | | IB | | 5267.50 | | | | 16.58333 | | | | | 0.00000 | | |
| 3.FLT | | 10000114 | | 9000.00 | | | | | 25.71429 | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | | IB | | 14267.50 | | | | 42.29762 | | | | | 0.00000 | | |
| Awd Adjust | | | | -9000.00 | | | | | -25.71429 | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | | IB | | 5267.50 | | | | 16.58333 | | | | | 0.00000 | | |
| +CERT 01/31/93 | | | | 3900.00 | | | | | 11.14286 | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | | IB | | 9167.50 | | | | 27.72619 | | | | | 0.00000 | | |
| +CERT 02/28/93 | | | | 5100.00 | | | | | 14.57413 | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | | IB | | 14267.50 | | | | 42.29762 | | | | | 0.00000 | | |
| -CH30 Adjust | | | | -5100.00 | | | | | -14.57413 | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | | IB | | 9167.50 | | | | 27.72619 | | | | | 0.00000 | | |
| +CH30 Balance | | | | 2895.83 | | | | | 8.27381 | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | | IB | | 12063.33 | | | | 36.00000 | | | | | 0.00000 | | |
| Extension allowed = (6795.83/9000.00) | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 980.00 or 2204.17 | | | | | | | | Percent:  75.51 | | | | | | | |
| +CERT EXTENSION | | | | 980.00 | | | | | 2.80000 | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | | 0/IB | | 13043.33 | | | | 38.80000 | | | | | 0.00000 | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| Deleting Awards and Certs | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| 4. APP? 10000123 | | | | 862.50 | | | | | 2.25000 | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | | IB | |  | | | |  | | | | |  | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| + FLIGHT AMOUNTS CHARGED .............. | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | 6795.83 | | | | 19.41667 | | | | | 0.00000 | | |
| + CORRESPONDENCE AMOUNTS CHARGED ...... | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | 1357.00 | | | | 4.58333 | | | | | 0.00000 | | |
| + OJT AMOUNTS CHARGED ................. | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | 3892.50 | | | | 12.00000 | | | | | 0.00000 | | |
| + APP AMOUNTS CHARGED  ................ | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | 0.00000 | | |
| + EXTENSION AMOUNTS CHARGED............ | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | 980.00 | | | | 2.80000 | | | | | 0.00000 | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| = AWARD/CERT TOTALS | | | | | | 38.00000 | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | |  | | | | 13043.33 | | | | |  | | | | |  | | |
| - EXTENSION ADJUST | | | | | | 2.80000 | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | |  | | | |  | | | | | 36.00000 | | | | | 0.00000 | | |
| - M/R TOTALS | | | | | | 38.80000 | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | |  | | | | 13043.33 | | | | |  | | | | |  | | |
| - OLD EXT ADJUST | | | | | | 2.80000 | | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | |  | | | |  | | | | | 36.00000 | | | | | 0.00000 | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| = AWARD TRANSACTION TOTAL.............. | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00000 | | | | | 0.00000 | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | PROCEEDS | | | | | | A/R | | | | | BENE | | | | ------- SUMMARY FIELDS ----- | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | |  | | | | | |  | | | | | AUTH | | | | PROCEEDS | | | | | A/R | | | | | CHECK | | |
| M/R Totals........ | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | |
| Bene Authorized... | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | |
| Apply Proceeds (#1) | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | |
| Apply Bene Auth ( ) | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | |
| Less than $5.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | |
| Apply Proceeds (#2) | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | |
| Release Proceeds | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| Proceeds Applied = | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | -M/R Totals .. | | | | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | |
| Bene Auth Applied | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | =Net Charge .. | | | | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | 0.00 | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| TX | PROC 59B | | | A/R | | | AUTHORIZE | | | | | | LT$5 | | | | | | CHECK | | | | CH30 | | CH34 | | | | -- EXT -- | | | | |
| ADD | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | | | 0.00 | | | | 0.00 | | 0.00 | | | | 980.00 | | | | 2 24 |
| OLD COMMENTS | | | |  | | |  | | | | | |  | | | | | |  | | | |  | |  | | | | |  | | |  |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| AUTHORIZED: | | | | | YES | | | | | | BY:  DOGGIE J URBANSKY ON 06/17/1993 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| NEW COMMENTS: | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

**Figure 4.04.  PC Amended On-the Job Training Award Tearsheet (Continued)**

**SUBCHAPTER V.  AUTOMATIC RATE INCREASES**

**4.31  BACKGROUND**

---

**a**.  Public Law 102-568, the Veterans Benefits Act of 1992, increased the [chapter 30] educational assistance allowance rates effective April 1, 1993.  The law also provided for a rate increase on October 1, 1993, and each succeeding October 1st.  The increase would be based on the change in the CPI (Consumer Price Index) from June to June.

**b**.  Public Law 103-66, the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993, canceled the October 1, 1993, rate increase.  The law also provided that the amount of the October 1, 1994, increase would be one-half of the CPI.  Rate increases after October 1, 1994, would be based on the full change in the CPI.  If not adjusted by legislation, future rate increases will be equal to the percentage change in the CPI.

**c.** Public Law 105-178, the Transportation Equality Act for the 21st Century, canceled the automatic increase due October 1, 1998 and substituted a 20% rate increase.  The law also provided that in future cost of living increases, the full-time rate has to be rounded to the nearest dollar.  [Public Law 106-419, Veterans Benefits and Health Care Improvement Act of 2000, cancelled the automatic increase due October 1, 2000 and substituted a 21.3% increase.]

**4.32  CHAPTER 30 [BDN] CHANGES**

---

The Hines BDC will update the Chapter 30 BDN system with the new rates by mid-August for a rate increase that is effective on October 1st of that year.  (These adjusted rates will be installed unless pending legislation would be signed into law in the immediate future and would change these new rates.)  All awards processed on or after the date of the update will generate October 1st award lines with reason code 37 if the award ends after October 1st.  [  ]

**4.33  AUTOMATED ADJUSTMENTS**

---

**a.**  The automated adjustment run is usually scheduled for the first weekend after the Full‑File Pass for the month before the effective date of a rate increase.  The Hines BDC will attempt to automatically adjust all records that had awards processed before the new rates were available in the BDN system.

**b.** The automated adjustment run needs exclusive use of the Chapter 30 BDN system when trying to adjust records.  Chapter 30 BDN processing is not available during the weekend of a scheduled adjustment run. 

**c.** Each RPO will receive a listing, during the week following an adjustment run, showing each record that was not automatically adjusted.  The listing will also show the reason why the record could not be automatically adjusted.

**d.**  In the event of legislation delaying installation until after the effective date of the increase, separate instructions will be issued to the RPOs for processing the increase.

**4.34  REVIEW AND ADJUSTMENT OF AWARDS**

---

Review each unadjusted record and take any necessary award action based on the reasons shown below:

**a.  M OVERRIDE ON AWARD.**  Review the record to determine if the M override is proper.  If the M override is no longer required, do an amended award to remove the M override and to generate an October 1st rate increase award line.  If the M override is proper, review the reason for the M override to determine the new October 1st rate.  Process an amended award with an October 1st date and a reason code 37.

**b.  SUSPENSE.**  The only records in suspense that cannot be adjusted are those records that are suspended with reason code 22, death of claimant.  See paragraphs 1.29, [4.11, and](#411) [4.12](#412) for additional information on [chapter 30] death processing.

**c.  CHARGES ON AWARD.**  The automatic adjustment cannot adjust any record where the monthly rate is based on total charges.  If the current monthly rate is less than the maximum allowed based on the training time, and an increased rate is not required, no adjustment is necessary.  If the current monthly rate is equal to the maximum amount payable based on the training time, compute the new monthly rate based on total charges and pay the computed rate or the new maximum allowed, whichever is *less*.

**d.  DROPPED PRIORS - REVIEW FOR ADJ.**  The automatic adjustment run does not calculate entitlement.  If a record has more than 15 award lines, the automatic adjustment would result in dropped prior award lines.  When award lines are dropped, dropped prior entitlement must be computed.  These records require amended awards to add the October 1st award line.  GAD/GAP processing will then determine the dropped prior entitlement and make any necessary adjustments. 

**e.  ENTIL EXH - KICKER INVOLVED.**  If the no pay reason on the last award line is 65, and a kicker is involved, the record cannot be automatically adjusted.  Process an amended award with an October 1st date and a reason code 37. 

**f.  LUMP SUM AWARD - REVIEW RATES.**  The automatic adjustment cannot adjust lump-sum awards since these awards are for less than one-half time training.  Use the procedures in [subparagraph c](#434c) above to determine if an increased rate is in order.  If an increased rate is required, follow the adjustment procedures for lump-sum awards in paragraph [4.14.](#414)

**g.  Other Messages.**  If you encounter any of the unadjusted messages listed below, contact the [CO Education Procedures Staff for additional instructions.  (See pt. I, par. 1.08 for contact information.)]

(1)  NO MASTER FOUND

(2)  DLC IN DROPPED AWARD

(3)  OUT OF BALANCE

**4.35  CHAPTER 30 PC SYSTEM AWARDS**

---

The RPOs receive separate instructions for updating the rates in the Chapter 30 PC payment system for apprenticeship, correspondence, flight, and on-job-training awards.  The new rates and installation instructions are sent at the end of the month before the effective date of the rate increase.

**4.36  ONE-TIME NOTICE**

---

All [chapter 30 trainees that have to submit monthly verifications of enrollment in October will receive a letter advising them of the new monthly rates effective October 1st.]

**4.37  END PRODUCT CREDIT**

---

Take [a supplemental EPC (End Product Code)] for each unadjusted record which requires an award action.  Take an EPC 330 for each unadjusted record which requires a review only.