# Sub-Chapter 9. Work-study Program

**Sub-Chapter 9. Work-study Program**

**a.** The work-study allowance is payable to students pursuing training with a Rate of Pursuit of .75 or greater. Work-study offers an additional benefit to students in return for their performing services in VA related activities.  Participants in the work-study program may work at the following locations:

* The school’s Office of Veterans Affairs
* A VA Regional Office
* VA medical facilities
* Approved State employment offices

**b. Appying for Work-Study**

Individuals must apply for work-study benefits by submitting a VA form 22-8691 (Application for Work-Study Allowance) in order to participate in the work-study program.

**c. Definition of Work-Study**

[Public Law 111-275](https://www.congress.gov/111/plaws/publ275/PLAW-111publ275.pdf) expands the definition of “qualifying work-study activities” to include the following (**effective October 1, 2011):**

* Any activity of a State veterans agency related to providing assistance to veterans in obtaining any benefit under title 38 U.S.C. or the laws of the State;
* A position working in a Center for Excellence for Veteran Student Success, as established under [20 U.S.C. 1161t](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:20 section:1161t edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title20-section1161t)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true), which purpose is to support and coordinate academic, financial, physical, and social needs of veteran students;
* A position working in a cooperative program carried out jointly by the Department and an institution of higher learning; and
* Any veterans-related position in an institution of higher learning.

Work-study allowances for the above-mentioned activities are payable for eligible individuals beginning October 1, 2011.

**d. Applicant Selection**

VA will select students for the work-study program based on certain factors, including the following:

* The student’s service-connected disability (VA will give the highest priority to a veteran who has a service-connected disability or disabilities rated by VA at 30% or more).
* The student’s ability to complete the work-study contract before the end of his or her eligibility for education benefits.
* Job availability within normal commuting distance for the student.

The number of applicants selected will depend on the availability of VA-related work at the student’s school or at VA facilities in the area.

**e. Benefit Payment Details**

Participants in the work-study program will earn an hourly wage equal to the greater of the Federal minimum wage or the State minimum wage.

For those with work-study jobs at a college or university, the school may pay the difference between the amount VA pays and the amount the school normally pays other work-study students doing the same job.

Students may choose to be paid in advance for 40% of the number of hours in their work-study agreement, or for 50 hours, whichever is less. After students have completed the hours covered by their first payment, VA will pay them each time they complete 50 hours of service.

**f. Hours Requirement**

Students may work during or between periods of enrollment. Students can arrange with VA to work any number of hours during enrollment. NOTE: The total number of hours worked can’t be more than 25 times the number of weeks in a student’s enrollment period.

**g. Type of Work Available**

The position description must clearly specify the nature of acceptable veteran-related activities to be performed.  Acceptable activities include, but are not limited to: 

* Assisting with dissemination of general information regarding veteran benefits and/or services
* Providing assistance to Veteran students with general inquiries about veteran benefits via phone, email, or in person
* Maintaining and organizing veteran-related files
* Processing VA paperwork at schools or VA offices
* Performing outreach services under the supervision of a VA employee
* Performing services at VA medical facilities or the offices of the National Cemetery Administration

The work a student actually does will depend on his or her interests and the type of work available.

 

**Sources**

[PL 111-377](https://www.congress.gov/111/plaws/publ377/PLAW-111publ377.pdf), Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act of 2010, Title II Other Educational Assistance Matters, Section 105. Educational Assistance for Programs of Education Other than Programs of Education Leading to a Degree

Electronic Code of Federal Regulations, [§ 21.9670 Work-study allowance](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_19670)

Last updated: 

October 6, 2015