# PART 01, GENERAL. CHAPTER 04. PROCEDURES FOR REGIONALIZED PROCESSING

**﻿﻿﻿﻿PART 01, GENERAL. CHAPTER 04. PROCEDURES FOR REGIONALIZED PROCESSING**  
(Updated March 21, 2005)

[4.01 Purpose](#401)  
[4.02 Jurisdiction [  ]](#402)  
[4.03 [Reserved]](#403)  
[4.04 [RO Education Coordinator]](#404)  
[4.05 [Reserved]](#405)  
[4.06 [Reserved]](#406)  
[4.07 Use of [Electronic Mail] to Obtain Information](#407)  
[4.08 Referral of Approval [Data] to RPOs](#408)  
[4.09 RPO Requests for Approval Data](#409)  
[4.10 Counseling](#410)  
[4.11 Veterans Assistance Inquiry Procedures](#411)  
[4.12 Processing Monthly [Verifications] of Attendance](#412)  
[4.13 Additional Processing Issues](#413)  
[4.14 Need for Training](#414)  
[4.15 Optical Disk [ ] System](#415)  
[4.16 Disposition Instructions](#416)

**4.01 PURPOSE**

---

This chapter provides [education] procedures that apply to all ROs (Regional Offices). These procedures affect the Adjudication, Veterans Services, Administrative, and VR&C (Vocational Rehabilitation and Counseling) divisions and Finance activities. The special procedures in this chapter are needed to ensure that the regionalized processing of [education benefits] works correctly. [The term "local RO" is used in this chapter to mean those ROs which do not have education processing functions.]

**4.02 JURISDICTION [  ]**

---

See [Part 3: Chapter 1 - Administrative Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073486?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)

**4.03 [RESERVED]**

---

**4.04 [RO EDUCATION COORDINATOR**

---

**a. General.** The RO Director will designate an education coordinator and an alternate education coordinator. These individuals should be familiar with all education benefits. ROs can use a team concept instead of having an individual coordinator.

**b. General Duties.** The education coordinator will be the primary contact point for the RPOs. He or she will also be responsible for transferring material from claims folders. See [Part 3: Chapter 1 - Administrative Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073486?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)

**c. Specific Benefit Duties.** The education coordinator will also have the following duties specified in the following references:

1. Chapter 30. See [Part 5: Chapter 8 - Miscellaneous](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000076326?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), paragraphs 8.01-8.07

2. Chapter 32. See [Part 6: Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073576?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), paragraphs 4.03, 4.04, 4.15, 4.16

3. Chapter 35. See  [Part 7: Chapter 3 - Eligibility Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073695?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), paragraphs 3.01 and 3.12-3.14. The education coordinator should have basic knowledge of chapter 35 eligibility requirements, be familiar with service-connected disability and death ratings, and be able to identify rating notification dates by reviewing a veteran's claims folder. He or she will answer RPO questions about extract information, expedite extracts as necessary, and otherwise serve as the RO's central point of contact for chapter 35 issues.

4. Chapter 1606. See  [Part 8: Chapter 8 - Miscellaneous](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000075619?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)Section 8.06. The education coordinator will have the duties of both the VSD and Adjudication coordinators.]

**4.05 RESERVED**

---

**4.06 RESERVED**

---

**4.07 USE OF [ELECTRONIC MAIL] TO OBTAIN INFORMATION**

---

The RPOs will need to obtain information from the claims folder and the local school approval file in certain cases. Likewise, the local ROs may need information from the RPOs. Whenever feasible, use [electronic mail] to accomplish these exchanges of information. Station management should ensure that the ELR (Education Liaison Representative) and the Adjudication Officer are listed in the [electronic mail directory]. ELRs should review their mailboxes at least once a day. See [*Section 4.09(b)*](#409b) for a list of RPO school approval mailboxes which should be used for school approval issues. The other mailboxes should be used to exchange information other than routine school approvals.

**4.08 REFERRAL OF APPROVAL [DATA] TO RPOS**

---

The RPOs should obtain course approval data from local ROs using the OLAF (On-Line Approval File) system described in [Training Guide 20-89-2A, Revised, dated May 10, 1996. (This will eventually be moved to] [Part 9: Chapter 1 - General](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000075637?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&).) [ ]

**4.09 RPO REQUESTS FOR APPROVAL DATA**

---

In certain cases, the RPO will not have the necessary approval data on OLAF and must get this data directly from the local RO. There may be other cases where the RPO requires clarification of previous approval data from the local RO.

**a. Referrals to ELRs.** The RPO will refer these inquiries to the ELR [at the local RO. The ELR can request assistance from his or her station if such inquiries increase.

**b. [Electronic]-Mail.** When possible, use [electronic mail to exchange information. Microsoft Exchange has replaced Wang electronic mail. Each RO should create an electronic mail box for their ELR in Microsoft Exchange. After the ROs create these mail boxes, RPOs will send approval requests to these mail boxes.]

**c.  Request Content.** On requests for school approval information, the RPO will show the school, program, and the claimant's [file] number. The RPO will ask the ELR [having jurisdiction over the school] to reply with all the information necessary (as required by [Part 4: Chapter 1 - Enrollment Certification](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073421?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)) to process the application. The RPO must also inform the ELR if certain schools have not filled out the VA Form 22-1999, Enrollment Certification, properly. If this happens, the local ELRs should contact such schools to prevent a recurrence of the problem.

**d. Turnaround Time.** ELRs will reply to a request for approval information from the RPO within 1 work day.

**4.10 COUNSELING**

---

The provisions in  [Part 3: Chapter 5 - Counseling](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073887?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)*, Counseling*, apply.

**4.11 VETERANS ASSISTANCE INQUIRY PROCEDURES**

---

[Cross references to be added.]

**4.12 PROCESSING MONTHLY [VERIFICATIONS] OF ATTENDANCE**

---

**a. General.** No chapter 30 payments are issued without a verification or certification of attendance (except advance payments and lump sum payments). See  [Part 5: Chapter 6 - Certifications](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000077042?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), for detailed instructions for chapter 30 certification processing. [ ]

**b. IHL (Institution of Higher Learning) and NCD (Non-College Degree) Training.** Each student who is enrolled in a program which leads to a standard college degree (IHL program), or in a program which does not lead to a standard college degree (NCD program), uses VA Form 22-8979, Student Verification of Enrollment, to [verify] his or her enrollment. The student completes each item to certify the enrollment for the period shown and will enter his or her signature and the date at the bottom of the form.  School officials do not need to review or sign this form.  See  [Part 5: Chapter 6 - Certifications](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000077042?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), for a sample copy. [ROs should enter certification transactions into BDN (Benefits Delivery Network) under the circumstances specified in [subparagraph d.](#412d)

**c.** [**Replacement Forms.** Occasionally, an RO may need to issue a VA Form 22-8979-1 as a replacement or to expedite payment. In such situations, the RO should use existing blank stock of the proper form, if available, and add the RPO's return address.]

**d.** [**Phone Calls**

1. During the first five days of the month, all ROs should advise claimants of the need to complete and return the [verification form to their RPO].

2. After the 5th of the month, ROs will accept verifications received in the form of telephone calls from students who report either not receiving VA Form 22-8979 or losing VA Form 22-8979.

i. If the student has a running chapter 30 master record and reports no change in his or her enrollment, enter this data into BDN using the CERT (Certification) command and the 317 Certification screen. (See [Part 2: Chapter 6 - BDN Processing - General](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000077365?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)*Section 6.12*.)

ii. If the student has a running chapter 30 master record but reports a change in his or her enrollment, do not enter this data into BDN. Refer the information to the appropriate RPO.]

**4.13 ADDITIONAL PROCESSING ISSUES** (See [RPO Letter 22-05-10](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000062500?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)*, Designation of Liaison Between Education and VR&E*)

---

**a. Administrative Procedures.** In addition to the procedures outlined in [Part 3: Chapter 1 - Administrative Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073486?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), special care should be used in the following situations.

1. Original Claims. If a local RO receives an original claim on VA Form 22-1990, send the document to the appropriate RPO.

2. Requests for Transfer-Out of Education or Chapter 30 Folders. Only the following types of stations should ever request a transfer of an education or a chapter 30 folder from the RPO: other RPOs, VA Central Office, the local RO requiring review of an education appellate issue by the claimant's designated representative before certification, the BVA (Board of Veterans Appeals), or the COVA (Court of Veterans Appeals). When the RPO receives a request for transfer-out of an education folder from a local RO, the RPO must check by telephone (or electronic mail) with the requesting station to see what type of document the requesting station has received.

i. If the requesting station has an education document, the RPO will advise the station to refer that document to the RPO

ii. If the requesting station has a document relating to a different benefit, i.e., C&P, REPS, or chapter 31, the RPO should advise the requesting station that the RPO does not have jurisdiction over that benefit (c) If the requesting station has a valid reason for requesting the education or the chapter 30 folder, the RPO will make a temporary transfer.

3. Changes of Address. All ROs will process changes of address (including establishing and changing direct deposits for education claimants. (See [PART 01, GENERAL. CHAPTER 10, DIRECT DEPOSIT](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000072665?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), for direct deposit information.)

**b. Chapter 31 Claims.** (See [RPO Letter 22-05-10](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000062500?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)*, Designation of Liaison Between Education and VR&E*) The procedures shown below prevent the duplication of education benefits and chapter 31 benefits. Also see [Part 3: Chapter 2 - Administrative Procedures](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073501?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) *Section 2.03*, on administrative error, and  [Part 4, Award Issues. Chapter 3 - Duplication of Benefits](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073517?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)*, Sections 3.01 and 3.02*, regarding duplicate education benefits.

1. [Chapter 31 Coordinator. Each RPO should have an assigned primary and alternate Chapter 31 Coordinator to serve as a point of contact for the chapter 31 offices within the RPO’s jurisdiction. These coordinators are responsible for insuring that the termination of the education record is processed timely and then confirming with Veteran Readiness and Employment (VR&E) via email that the requested adjustment was completed, to include the amount of any debt created.

2. Chapter 31 Award Actions. To avoid duplication of benefits, VR&E will contact the appropriate RPO Chapter 31 coordinator via e-mail when a claimant is being inducted into their program and an education award needs to be adjusted. When the RPO is contacted by VR&E to terminate an existing education award, the Chapter 31 Coordinator should take the following actions:

i. Process separate BDN MINQ (Master Record INQuiry) commands to review all education databases. Also review the claimant’s electronic file for any previously awarded benefits.

ii. If there is an education award history, the RPO’s Chapter 31 coordinator should terminate the award retroactely to the date specified by VR&E, using reason code 30. Be sure to suppress the BDN generated letter.

A. For chapter 30 or 1606, add a STOP message to the chaimant’s M21 screen to the effect that the claimant is now receiving chapter 31 benefits.

B. For chapter 32 or 35, set the file pull indicator to “Y” if the claimant has previously received either of these benefits.

C. The claimant’s electronic record should be annotated as well with an informative FLASH to prevent payment of education of education benefits until such time that notification is received that the claimant is no longer in receipt of chapter 31 benefits. The FLASH should include the effective date of the chapter 31 award.

iii. The RPO’s chapter 31 coordinator should confirm via e-mail to VR&E that the action was completed, the effective date, and amount of overpayment created. The e-mail received from VR&E requesting the termination action and the e-mail confirming the action was completed should be of record in the claimant’s electronic record. If an electronic fecord does not exist, the RPO should create one to include the e-mail, aard print and any other apprlicable correcpondence.VR&E (and not the RPO) will request that the overpayment be established in the chapter 31 record for recoupment.

*NOTE: Under chapter 31, a claimant who is eligible for chapter 30 may elect to receive the chapter 30 rate instead of the chapter 31 subsistence allowance rate plus reimbursement of tuition, fees, books, and supplies. A VR&E Specialist will forward VA Form 28-1905, Authorization and Certification of Entrance or Reentrance into Rehabilitation and Certification of Status, to the RPO in such cases. Claimants who elect to receive the chapter 30 rate for their chapter 31 training are paid in BDN just like any other chapter 30 claim. VR&C staff should advise such claimants that all of the rules and regulations of chapter 30 apply during the period that the chapter 30 rate is elected. Any program of study the vet is pursuing under chapter 31 must be approved for chapter 30 if the benefit is being paid under chapter 30. If a program is only approved for chapter 31 training, the enrollment may not be paid as a chapter 30 claim. The RPO will handle these cases in the same manner as any other chapter 30 case, using the same reason codes, applying mitigating circumstances rules etc.]*

**c. Change of File Number.** See [Part 2: Chapter 8 - Miscellaneous Target Processing](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000072991?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), and [Part 3: Chapter 1 - Administrative Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073486?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) *Sections 1.33, 1.34, 1.35, 1.36, and 1.37*, for proper procedures for changing file numbers. If the BIRLS LOC screen shows an education or a chapter 30 folder, the RO should advise the RPO if the file number changes.

**d.** [*Reserved for Future Use*.]

**e. Committee on Waiver Procedures.** The RPO Finance Division and Committee on Waivers and Compromises should assume jurisdiction for all chapter 30 waiver and compromise claims. If the claimant requests a hearing, the RPO will request the Committee on Waivers and Compromises at the proper station to conduct the hearing. Follow the procedure outlined in subparagraph j below.

**f. New Power of Attorney Received at Local RO.** If a local RO receives a power of attorney for an education claimant and no claims folder exists, the local RO should refer the power of attorney document to the RPO. If a claims folder exists, forward a copy of the power of attorney document to the RPO. Also, forward any changes. The RPO will enter the power of attorney code in the BDN master record.

**g.** *Reserved for Future Use*.

**h. Procedures for Education Appeals.**

1. If the RPO receives an appeal due to a rating board decision which adversely affected a claimant's education eligibility decision, the RPO will contact the Adjudication Officer, or designee, of the station that made the decision. The local station will handle the appeal and notify the RPO once the appeal is resolved.

2. The RPO will have jurisdiction over all other appeal issues in connection with education benefits including appeals of committee on waiver decisions. If the claimant requests a hearing, see subparagraph j below. If the record must be certified to the BVA, the RPO must obtain the red rope claims folder (if one exists) and refer the education or chapter 30 folder along with the claims folder to BVA. If there is no claims folder, this should be prominently noted on VA Form 1-8, Certification of Appeal.

3. When the RPO has jurisdiction over an appellate issue and the claimant's designated representative (e.g. the Maryland Department of Veterans Affairs, Army and Navy Union, USA), does not have a service officer at the RPO, the education or chapter 30 folder will be temporarily transferred to the local RO where the designated representative is located for review and completion of VA Form 1-646, Statement of Accredited Representative in Appealed Cases to the Board of Veterans Appeals. Subsequent to the representative's review of the education or chapter 30 folder, the red rope claims folder (if existent at a regional office) and the chapter 30 will be returned to the RPO for certification to the BVA. See [Part 3: Chapter 1 - Administrative Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073486?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), for folder transfer issues in general.

**i. Reports of Education Trainees by Regional Office and by Facility.** RCS (Reports Control Symbol) 20-0260, List of Active Institutions Under Title 38 and 10, provides the number of education trainees by program and facility. This report is used for scheduling compliance surveys. See M22-2, Part 07, for compliance survey procedures. (This information will be placed into [Part 10: Chapter 1 - Introduction](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000076426?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&).)

**j. Hearings**

1. Location of Hearings. (See [Policy Advisory - Hearing With No Appeal](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073122?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)) Claimants need not come to the RPO for hearings in education claims, but this would be ideal. Hearings should be conducted at the RO most convenient for the claimant. Hearings held at the RPO will follow the instructions outlined in *M21-MR, Part 01, Introduction, Chapter 04, Hearings*.

2. Hearings at Regional Offices. Hearings held at an RO rather than at the RPO should be conducted between the claimant and the RPO via videoconference if possible. If not, the hearing should be conducted via a conference call. The RPO of jurisdiction should contact the Decision Review Officer (DRO), or designee, of the station hosting the hearing to make the necessary arrangements. The RO will assist the RPO by scheduling the hearing, providing the facilities and equipment in the RO for the videoconference (or conference call, if necessary) and issuing the oath or affirmation. Because the claimant has a right to review all evidence used in determining the action under appeal, any relevant documents should be faxed to the RO if the hearing is being conducted remotely.

3. Authorized Employees. The RPO employee responsible for hearing the appeal and making a determination in the case must be at the GS 11 level or above. Any employee involved in the appealed decision may not conduct the hearing. The Education Officer should determine within his/her RPO who will hear the case.

4. Administrative Issues and Jurisdiction on Decisions. The RPO employee will record the hearing. It is permissible to solicit the claimant’s permission not to prepare a typed transcript of the hearing. If the claimant waives the transcription, the recording made shall be stored in a secure location at the RPO for a period of two years. The claimant’s waiver of transcription should be in writing, stating “*I hereby waive any requirement that the record of my hearing be transcribed. A hearing transcript will be prepared if my records are eventually referred to the Board of Veterans’ Appeals for a decision on this issue*.” The written statement should be forwarded to the RPO for inclusion in the claimant’s TIMS folder. Otherwise, transcripts of the hearings will be maintained by the RPO in the claimant's TIMS folder in all cases. The DRO, or designee, will administer the oath and will remain present during the teleconference but will not have any other responsibilities in the hearing. The RPO retains jurisdiction on all decisions resulting from hearings requested in connection with an appeal or waiver request.

5. Informal Conferences as an Alternative. An informal conference, as outlined in *M21-MR, Part 01, Introduction, Chapter 05, Appeals, Section N*, is permissible as well. An informal conference is an optional procedure the RPO may follow if it would be helpful. The purpose of an informal conference is to provide clarification or generally explain the issues, and to identify any other necessary evidence that may assist the claimant in his or her appeal. Such evidence may be faxed to the RPO during the informal conference. These informal conferences may be held via telephone or in person and are scheduled at the RPO’s discretion. In some cases, an informal conference may resolve the issue at hand.  If an informal conference does resolve the issue sufficiently to preclude the necessity for a hearing, the claimant’s written, signed statement indicating he or she is waiving the hearing should be included in his or her file.

*NOTE 1: A claimant has the right to a hearing at any time on any issue.* (*M21-MR, Part 01, Introduction, Chapter 04, Hearings, Section A(1)*)

*NOTE 2: Hearings requested in the Phillipines will be conducted by the Manila DRO, with the Muskogee RPO supplying any information needed via email.*

***k. Requests Under the Privacy Act.** Refer all requests concerning education records to the RPO. If a claimant wishes to review his or her record, the RPO temporarily transfers the education or chapter 30 folder to the office where the claimant will review the record.*

***l. Work-Study Procedures.** See* [PART 01, GENERAL. CHAPTER 09, WORK-STUDY ALLOWANCE PROGRAM](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000072609?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)*.*

**4.14 NEED FOR TRAINING**

---

Education benefits, including] chapter 30 should continue to be a regular training topic, especially in Veterans Services and Finance activities at ROs. VBCs (Veterans Benefits Counselors) should continue to answer general education inquiries. Eligibility determinations are made only by RPOs. The RO Finance activity should continue to process chapter 32 refunds. Some specific concerns which should be addressed through training are:

**a.** [**Education Benefits Sensitivity.** Local ROs should send all education claims (i.e., VA Forms 22-1990, 22‑5490, etc.) to the RPO for appropriate action. Only RPOs can make education eligibility determinations. Refer all eligibility questions to the RPO. ROs should not use BDN to advise claimants of their eligibility or ineligibility to benefits. (The 30D and DOD screens contains data subject to change. The M26 CH32 Participant Account Summary screen contains contribution data submitted by the individual's branch of military service.)]

**b.** [**Handling Refund Requests Properly.**

1. General. Veterans can receive refunds of chapter 32 contributions. They cannot receive refunds of chapter 30 pay reductions.

2. Chapter 30 Death Benefit. Chapter 30 does provide a death benefit if death is in service and is service connected. Refer claims for the chapter 30 death benefit to the Buffalo RPO. (See [Part 05, Chapter 30. Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000076293?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)*, Section 4.11(a)* and [Part 5 Chapter 1 - General](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073756?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)*,* *Section 1.29*.)

3. Chapter 32 Refunds. Generally, ROs process chapter 32 refunds for veterans within its jurisdiction. This also includes death refund development and refunds.

i. [The M26 screen shows chapter 32 remaining contributions and the amount of any contributions refunded. Review a veteran's chapter 32 Bank record. If the M26 screen shows remaining contributions (unrefunded contributions), the RO will process the refund application unless the application shows that the veteran is applying for chapter 30 benefits under the provisions of Public Law 104‑275. If the application shows that he or she is applying for chapter 30 under this public law and is received before October 9, 1997, send the refund application to the RPO.

ii. If the M27 CH32 Participant Contribution History screen does not show any contributions, determine if the veteran entered on duty after June 30, 1985. If the individual entered active duty after that date, send the refund request to the RPO for determining possible eligibility for chapter 30 benefits. Notify the veteran of this referral.

**4.15 OPTICAL DISK SYSTEM**

---

**a. Background.** Beginning in August of 1987, all chapter 30 claims processing was centralized at the St. Louis regional office in connection with an optical disk [imaging system designed as a replacement for paper records. In July 1989, claims processing was regionalized to include Atlanta, Buffalo, and Muskogee RPOs The St. Louis system was redesigned and installed at the Atlanta RPO. Subparagraph b should give all ROs some understanding of this unique claims processing environment.]

**b. Description.** Under the [imaging system, claims personnel review electronic images of documents on a computer terminal rather than the actual paper. The terminal screen uses multiple windows for displaying document images, for accessing BDN, for word processing, and for controlling the imaging system. The imaging system allows the operator to enter BDN data in one window while viewing the images of claims documents or school approval documents in another window. Some of the benefits of imaging] technology to claims processing are:

1. Immediate access to a claimant's folder when required. A folder is never lost or charged out.

2. Electronic maintenance of the folder. Documents do not get out of order in the electronic folder.

3. Access to a claimant's folder by more than one person at a time.

4. Use of one computer terminal to access the electronic folder, [BDN] and the local word processing system.

5. Permanent filing. Images stored on optical disk are permanent. Images cannot be altered.

6. Electronic routing of documents from one division to another or from one person to another.

7. Tighter control of the individual documents entering the regional office. [Supervisors can quickly determine the amount of the workload assigned to a particular individual, a unit, or even a division. After analyzing the workload, the supervisor can electronically adjust the work load by moving cases either to other employees or other units. He or she does not have to have employees count cases.]

**4.16 DISPOSITION INSTRUCTIONS**

---

All forms mentioned in this chapter, with the exception of the approval forms (VA Forms 22-1998a, Approval Information-Accredited Programs in Institutions of Higher Learning, through 22-1998b-1, Approval Information-Training Establishment), and the [VA Form 28-1905, Authorization and Certification of Entrance or Reentrance into Rehabilitation and Certification of Status] are to be filed in the [claimant's education] folder. [Dispose of chapter 30 folders according to Records Control Schedule VB-1, Part I, Item No 07-693.020. Disposition instructions for the [education folders, along with the imaging records, are pending.