# Archive dated 6/11/19: M22-4 Part 12 Chapter 11 - Glossary of Terms

**ARCHIVED EFFECTIVE 6/11/19**

**Glossary of Terms**

Definitions of terms and abbreviations used in the GI Bill public laws and VA Education Service documents

[A](#A)     [B](#b)     [C](#c)     [D](#d)     [E](#e)     [F](#f)     [G](#g)     [H](#h)     [I](#i)     [J](#j)     [K](#k)     [L](#l)     [M](#m)     [N](#n)     [O](#o)     [P](#p)     [Q](#q)     [R](#r)     [S](#s)     [T](#t)     [U](#u)     [V](#v)     [W](#w)     [Y](#y)     

**A**

**ACADEMIC YEAR** The period of time beginning August 1st of each calendar year and ending July 31st of the subsequent calendar year.

**ACCREDITING AGENCY** A nationally recognized agency or association which the Secretary of Education determines as a reliable authority on the quality of training offered by an educational institution. The Secretary publishes a list of these agencies and associations which SAAs (State Approving Agencies) use for establishing what courses may be approved under the provisions of [38 U.S.C. 3675](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3675 edition:prelim)).

**ACCRUED BENEFITS** Benefits payable to next of kin or other eligible beneficiaries of a deceased claimant; payments represent amounts due but unpaid at time of death.

**ACTIVE DUTY** Full-time duty in the regular components of the Armed Forces or under a call or order to active duty under [10 U.S.C 688](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:688 edition:prelim)), [12301(a)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:12301 edition:prelim)), [12301(d)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:12301 edition:prelim)), [12301(g)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:12301 edition:prelim)), [12302](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:12302 edition:prelim)), or [12304](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:12304 edition:prelim)). Title 32 service for the purposes of organizing, administering, recruiting, instructing, or training in the National Guard; or under [section 502(f)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:32 section:502 edition:prelim)) for the purpose of responding to a national emergency.

**ACTIVE DUTY FOR TRAINING** Active duty for training (ACDUTRA) in the Reserves or National Guard. This includes reservists on full-time duty for training purposes in the Armed Forces, or members of the National Guard or Air National Guard of any state, performing full-time training duty under [32 U.S.C. 316](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:32 section:316 edition:prelim)), [502](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:32 section:502 edition:prelim)), [503](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:32 section:503 edition:prelim)), [504](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:32 section:504 edition:prelim)), or [505](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:32 section:505 edition:prelim)).

**ACTIVE GUARD RESERVE** Active Guard Reserve (AGR) may be a member of the Reserve or National Guard who is on active duty for purposes other than training.

**ADVANCE PAYMENT** The monetary allowance that may be payable to a student for the first fractional (or full) month and the following full month of enrollment. These payments are mailed to schools before the beginning of classes for release to students who have completed registration.

**AFFIRMATION OF ENROLLMENT** The document (VA Form 22-1999c) signed by the [student] affirming an enrollment contract for a correspondence course. The date of affirmation must be 10 days after the Veteran or eligible person has signed the enrollment contract.

**ALTERNATIVE TEACHER CERTIFICATION PROGRAM** A program leading to a teacher's certificate that allows individuals with a bachelor's degree or graduate degree to obtain teacher certification without enrolling in an institution of higher learning.

**APPRENTICESHIP TRAINING** Apprenticeship training differs from on-the-job training (OJT) in that it combines OJT with classroom instruction to prepare workers for a job. Often after completing an apprenticeship, the student receives a Certificate of Apprenticeship. Examples of apprenticeship training include machinist, land surveyor, or baker.

**A/R** Accounts Receivable

**ARMED FORCES** The Armed Forces are the United States Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, and Coast Guard, including the reserve components thereof.

**ARMS** Automated Reference Materials System

**ATTENDANCE** The presence of a Veteran or eligible person in the class where the approved course is being taught at a training establishment; or any other place of instruction, training, or study designated by the educational institution or training establishment where the Veteran or eligible person is enrolled and is pursuing a program of education.

**AUDITED COURSE** Any credit course that a student attends as a listener only with a prior understanding between school officials and the student that such attendance will not result in credit being granted toward graduation.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**B**

**BAH** Basic Allowance for Housing

**BDN** Benefits Delivery Network, VA’s processing system for awards and related actions. This system generates the payment information that is sent to the Treasury for producing the benefit checks. BDN also contains the master education record files for Veterans and other beneficiaries (previously referred to as TARGET).

**BENEFICIARY IDENTIFICATION AND RECORDS LOCATOR SUBSYSTEM (BIRLS)** A computerized record system containing basic identifying information on a VA claimant including current location of the claimant's folder and service information.

**BINQ** BIRLS Inquiry, a BDN command to access BIRLS.

**BIRLS** Beneficiary Identification and Records Locator Subsystem

**BOARD OF VETERANS APPEALS (BVA)** The VA organization that handles appeals of Veteran benefit decisions.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**C**

****CAVC (THE COURT OF APPEALS FOR VETERANS CLAIMS)**** The Federal Appellate Court having initial appellate authority over decisions made or affirmed by BVA.

**CERTIFICATE OF ELIGIBILITY (C/E)** Correspondence to an applicant showing approval to pursue a stated program of education at a particular institution, the remaining entitlement of the student, and the ending date of the student’s eligibility. This is also abbreviated as COE.

**CERTIFICATION (CERT)** A BDN command used to verify school attendance.

**CERTIFICATION OF DELIVERY OF ADVANCE PAYMENT AND ENROLLMENT (COD)** VA Form 22-1999V containing preprinted information furnished to schools in a separate envelope when an advance payment check is issued for one of their students. This form must be completed by the certifying official and immediately returned to VA when the advance payment check is given to the student.

**CERTIFYING OFFICIAL** The person at an education institution whom VA has delegated the authority to sign enrollment certifications, other certification documents, and reports relating to VA benefits. This may also be abbreviated SCO.

**CHANGE OF ADDRESS (CADD)** A BDN command used to change a claimant's address.

****CHANGE OF PROGRAM**** A change in the educational, professional, or vocational objective for which the claimant entered training.

**CHANGE NAME (CNAM)** A BDN command used to change a claimant's name.

**CHARACTER OF DISCHARGE** A service department's characterization of a particular period of service. Examples include honorable, other than honorable, and dishonorable.

**CHAPTER 1606** This benefit refers to the Montgomery GI Bill for Selected Reserve participants. This is also abbreviated MGIB-SR.

**CHAPTER 1607** This benefit refers to the Reserve Educational Assistance Program (REAP). REAP has a sunset date of November 25, 2015. No new applications may be received after that date.

**CHAPTER 30** This benefit refers to the Montgomery GI Bill for Active Duty. This is also abbreviated MGIB.

**CHAPTER 31** This benefit refers to the Vocational Rehabilitation and Employment benefit for those with service-connected disabilities. Also known as VR&E benefits.

**CHAPTER 32** A contributory educational assistance program provided for Post-Vietnam Era Veterans under [Chapter 32 of title 38, U.S. Code](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title38/part3/chapter32&edition=prelim). This is also known as VEAP (Veterans Education Assistance Program).

**CHAPTER 33** This benefit is the Post 9/11 GI Bill.

**CHAPTER 35** This benefit is also known as the Survivors’ and Dependents’ Educational Assistance (DEA). This benefit is payable to eligible dependents and survivors of Veterans under [Chapter 35 of title 38, U.S. Code](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title38/part3/chapter35&edition=prelim).

**CHIEF EDUCATION LIAISON OFFICER (CELO)** There is one Chief Education Liaison Officer at each Regional Processing Office (RPO).

**CLAIMS ADJUDICATION (CADJ)** A BDN command used to process a claim.

**CLAIMS DEVELOPMENT (CDEV)** A BDN command usually used to send development letters.

**CLAIMS ESTABLISHMENT (CEST)** A BDN command used to establish appropriate control for a claim.

**COLLEGE FUND KICKER** An individual’s branch of service may offer the College Fund (also known as a “kicker”) as part of an enlistment or reenlistment contract, or for other reasons they determine. The College Fund is an additional amount of money that increases an individual’s basic monthly benefit and is included in his or her VA payment.

****CONCURRENT ENROLLMENT**** Enrollment at more than one school at the same time (the dates of course pursuit at each school may overlap). When a student cannot successfully schedule his or her complete program at one school, or cannot complete his or her program within the planned period to complete an objective, a student may pursue courses at a second institution. The primary institution certifies that supplemental school pursuit will be accepted at full credit toward the student's course objective.

**CONDITION INTERFERED WITH DUTY (CIWD)** This is a separation reason designating a type of release from active duty.

**CONFIRMED ENROLLMENT** An enrollment certification which is dated and signed by the school's certifying official on or after the first day of a certified enrollment period.

**CONVENIENCE OF GOVERNMENT (COG)** A separation reason from active duty which allows discharge before completion of the obligated period of service. COG is most often used in determining eligibility under Chapters 30 and 32.

**COOPERATIVE TRAINING (COOP)** Training that allows an individual to attend school and gain work experience at the same time. Some schools partner with employers, allowing the individual to attend classes in his or her desired field.

**CORRECTION (CORR)** A BDN command used to change specific fields in BDN records.

**CORRESPONDENCE TRAINING (CORR)** In correspondence training, students receive lessons in the mail or via e-mail. Students have a certain amount of time to complete and return the lessons for a grade. This is different from distance learning, which is completed on a strict schedule. Examples include training to become a photographer, locksmith, or gunsmith.

**COST OF COURSE** The total cost of tuition and fees for a course that an educational institution charges to everyone who attends their institution.

**COURSE** A unit of instruction required for an approved program of education that provides an individual with the knowledge and skills necessary to meet the requirements of the selected educational, professional, or vocational objective.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**D**

**DATE OF AFFIRMATION** The date, which is not less than 7 days after the date a student signs an enrollment agreement for a correspondence course on which the student signs and submits to VA a written agreement affirming the enrollment agreement.

**DATE OF LAST CERTIFICATION (DLC)** The last date through which an eligible person's training has been verified. The DLC field on BDN shows the day following the actual date of last certification. For example, if the Veteran's training has been verified through June 30; DLC on BDN will show July 1.

**DATE OF LAST PAYMENT (DLP)** The last date through which payment has been issued based on a student's enrollment. The DLP field on BDN shows the day following the actual date of last payment. For example, if the Veteran has been paid through April 30, DLP on BDN will show May 1.

**DD FORM 214** The Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty which is prepared at the time an individual completes a period of active duty in the Armed Forces. Former members of the Public Health Service and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration do not receive a DD Form 214. Veterans of these branches of service receive comparable documents which provide necessary information concerning their active duty service.

**DEPENDENTS' EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE (DEA) PROGRAM—CHAPTER 35 OF TITLE 38, U.S. CODE** The benefits payable to eligible dependents and survivors of Veterans under [Chapter 35 of title 38, U.S. Code](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title38/part3/chapter35&edition=prelim). See [Chapter 35](#c35).

**DEFECTIVE ENLISTMENT** An agreement for enlistment into military service which is voided for one of the following reasons: (1) the individual enlisted was a minor for purposes of service in the Armed Forces; (2) the enlistment or induction was erroneous; or (3) the enlistment agreement was defective. A defective enlistment is a factor in chapter 30 and chapter 33 determinations.

**DEFICIENCY COURSE** Any secondary level course or subject not previously completed satisfactorily but specifically required for pursuit of a post-secondary program of education.

**DELAYED ENLISTMENT PROGRAM (DEP)** A form of delayed entry which allows individuals to contract to enter on active duty in the Armed Forces at a later date. The periods of time of the delayed entry onto active duty vary according to the specific program involved. For example, under DEP, the delayed entry onto active duty varies up to 270 days. In other programs, such as Reserve Officers' Training Corps (ROTC), the delay may be several years.

**DELIMITING DATE (DD)** The first day after a claimant's period of eligibility expires. Benefits are not payable on or after the delimiting date.

**DEPENDENT** A Veteran or service member’s spouse, biological child, adopted child, or stepchild.

**DISCHARGE (OR RELEASE)** Dismissal or release from a period of service. (See [38 U.S.C.101(18)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:101 edition:prelim)) for special circumstances which may be considered a discharge)

**DISTANCE LEARNING** A formalized teaching system that consists of interaction between the student and the instructor (who is physically separated from the student) through the use of communications technology instead of regularly scheduled, conventional classroom or laboratory sessions. Communications technology includes mail, telephone, audio or videoconferencing, computer technology (online Internet courses or e-mail), or other electronic means such as one-way and two-way transmissions through open broadcast, closed circuit, cable, microwave, broadband lines, fiber optics, satellite, or wireless communications devices.

**DIVISIONS OF THE SCHOOL YEAR** An ordinary school year is generally a period of 2 semesters or 3 quarters which is not less than 30 or more than 39 weeks in total length. Other divisions of the school year are terms, quarters, semesters, summer terms, and summer sessions.

**DMC** This is the abbreviation of the Debt Management Center which is the VA facility which manages all debt collection for VA.

**DMDC (DEFENSE MANPOWER DATA CENTER) RECORD** The DMDC record contains information from the Serviceperson's military records. VA accesses the Department of Defense's (DOD's) manpower database through computer interface between DMDC in Monterey, CA, and the BDN system. This data is used primarily for chapters 30 and 1606.

**DOD** An abbreviation for the United States Department of Defense.

**DUAL ENTITLEMENT** Eligibility to education benefits under two or more programs administered by VA. If an individual qualifies for educational assistance under two or more such programs, the total assistance available may not exceed an aggregate total of 48 months, or the equivalent in part-time benefits. A person having dual eligibility may not receive more than one benefit at a time. There are rare instances in which a dependent may be eligible to 81 months with dual entitlement.

**DUPLICATE CLAIM (DUPC)** A BDN command used to combine duplicate file numbers in BDN.

**DUPLICATION OF BENEFITS** Concurrent payment of education benefits under more than one VA program and concurrent payment of VA education benefits and payment under certain other federal benefit programs.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**E**

**EARLY-OUT DISCHARGE** A discharge before the completion of the obligated period of service; may be a factor in eligibility for chapters 30 and 32.

**EDUCATION CASE MANAGER (ECM)** An employee at the Education Call Center (ECC) responsible for providing assistance to claimants who call the toll free education benefit helpline.

**EDUCATION COMPLIANCE SURVEY SPECIALIST (ECSS)** An employee at a RPO responsible for conducting compliance surveys at training establishments and institutions.

**EDUCATION LIAISON REPRESENTATIVE (ELR)** An individual at a RPO responsible for the education liaison and program approval functions. The ELR is responsible for promptly informing SAAs, schools, and training establishments of changes in policies and procedures.

**EDUCATION OFFICER (EO)** An individual at the RPO with management responsibility for education awards and other actions.

**EDUCATION SERVICES OFFICER (ESO)** An ESO is a person assigned the responsibility for advising service members of the educational opportunities available to active duty personnel. This includes civilian ESOs, military career counselors, and other employees of military education offices.

**EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE** The monetary benefits received by a Veteran or eligible person. This term is generally used interchangeably with the term "education benefits." However, under the Montgomery GI Bill—Active Duty, the term "educational assistance" means basic educational assistance, supplemental educational assistance, and all additional amounts payable, commonly called "kickers."

**EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION** Any public or private elementary school, secondary school, vocational school, correspondence school, business school, junior college, teachers' college, college, normal school, professional school, university, or scientific or technical institution, or other institution furnishing education for adults. It also includes training establishments and organizations that offer licensing and certification tests. See also "Training Establishment".

**EDUCATIONAL OBJECTIVE** An objective is one that leads to the awarding of a diploma, degree or certificate which reflects educational attainment

**EFFECTIVE DATE** An effective date or “as of date” is the date upon which something (a rule, law, or other) is considered to take effect. This may be different from the date upon which the event actually occurs or is recorded.

**ELECTRONIC CERTIFICATION AUTOMATED PROGRAM (ECAP)** An automated program that processes enrollment certifications and changes in student status submitted from school certifying officials.

**END PRODUCT CODE (EPC)** A BDN code representing the work credit a RPO and/or employee receives for a particular type of claim.

**ENROLLED** A student is registered at an institution and is therefore enrolled; however, he or she may not be attending courses or receiving VA Education benefits. For example, an individual applies to an institution and is accepted in November 2010, but his or her term does not begin until August 2011.

**ENROLLMENT** The state of being on the rolls or file of a school which contains the names of active students.

**ENROLLMENT PERIOD** A period of time during which a student is enrolled in an educational institution in pursuit of a program of education (i.e. term, quarter, or semester).

**ENTERED ON DUTY (EOD)** An abbreviation for the date that a Veteran or service member entered on active duty.

**ENTITLEMENT** The number of months the student is eligible for VA education benefits. This is usually expressed in the number of months and days the student will be eligible for full-time benefits, or the equivalent in part-time training, but also may be expressed in a dollar amount. Entitlement may vary depending on the education program the individual qualifies under. In most situations, entitlement will not exceed 48 months under any combination of laws. Exceptions may exist under Transfer of Entitlement for Dependents.

**EQUIVALENT CLOCK HOURS** Clock hours arrived at when a student takes any course creditable toward a standard college degree. VA will determine the equivalent clock hours if a semester or quarter-hour course overlaps with a primary course measured on a clock-hour basis. Using a formula, the credit hours are converted into equivalent clock hours. VA treats equivalent clock hours as clock hours for measurement purposes.

**EQUIVALENT CREDIT HOURS** Credit hours arrived at when a term is not a standard semester or quarter. VA will determine the equivalent for full-time undergraduate training. Using a formula, the result is called equivalent credit hours. VA treats equivalent credit hours as credit hours for measurement purposes.

**ESTABLISHED CHARGE** The actual charge for tuition and fees that similarly circumstanced nonveterans enrolled in the program of education are required to pay; OR, the lesser of the charge for a student’s correspondence course or courses determined on the basis of the lowest extended time payment plan offered by the educational institution and approved by the appropriate SAA, or the actual cost to the student.

**EXISTED PRIOR TO SERVICE (EPTS)** An abbreviation for a "qualifying disability" that a claimant is determined to have had before entry on active duty.

**EXPIRATION OF TERM OF SERVICE (ETS)** This is a separation reason shown on DD Form 214. Generally, ETS is considered to be a type of COG discharge.

**EXTERNAL DEGREE** A standard college degree given by an accredited college or university based on satisfactory completion of a prescribed program of independent study. The program may require occasional attendance for a workshop or seminar and may include some regular residence course work.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**F**

**FACILITY CODE (FAC)** The numeric code assigned by VA to an institution specifically identifying it or one of its subdivisions.

**FEES** Any mandatory charges (other than tuition, room, and board) that are applied by the institution of higher learning for pursuit of an approved program of education. Fees include, but are not limited to, health premiums, freshman fees, graduation fees, and lab fees.

**FIRST NOTICE OF DEATH (FNOD)** An abbreviation for the first information showing that a claimant has died. This is also a BDN command to update the Master Records.

**FISCAL AUTHORIZATION (FAUT)** A BDN command to authorize/approve a FIST. A person other than the individual who processed the FIST command must process the FAUT command.

**FISCAL TRANSACTION (FIST)** A BDN command to adjust accounts payable and/or receivable.

**FLIGHT TRAINING** Training provided by an FAA (Federal Aviation Administration) approved school which leads to a vocational objective in the field of aviation or a standard college degree.

**FULL FILE PASS (FFP)** A term used on monthly schedules of operation in BDN to indicate when certain processing occurs. FFP issues certification forms, processes delinquent certifications, generates collection letters and produces reports.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**G**

****GENERAL EDUCATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (GED) CERTIFICATE**** A certificate issued by a State-level department of education which is acceptable as the equivalent of a high school diploma. In addition, a DOD certificate of GED equivalency is acceptable evidence of completion of high school educational requirements.

**GENERATE AND DISPLAY (GAD)** A command used to have BDN show the generated award information.

**GENERATE AND PRINT (GAP)** A command used to have BDN show appropriate award information and moves the award to the authorization phase of processing.

**GRADUATE RESIDENT TRAINING** Graduate resident training is a course which is offered through regularly scheduled, conventional classroom or laboratory sessions, or consists of research necessary for the preparation of the student's master's thesis, doctoral dissertation, or a similar treatise which is a prerequisite to the degree being pursued.

**GRANDFATHER RULES** Students who were attending a private college or university in certain states, and have been enrolled in the same program since January 4, 2011. These students will be reimbursed either the actual cost of the program or the maximum in-state tuition and fee reimbursement rate for the 2010-2011 school year, whichever is greater. These rules apply only to Chapter 33 students

**GUNNERY SERGEANT (GYSGT)** A noncommissioned officer ranking above a staff sergeant and below a first or master sergeant (Marine Corps).

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**H**

**HONORABLE (HON)** An abbreviation for a type of discharge from service.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**I**

**IMPLEMENTATION DATE** The date a rule or law was put into effect.

**INDEPENDENT STUDY** A course which consists of a prescribed program of study with provision for interaction between the student and the regularly employed faculty of the school and is offered without any regularly scheduled conventional classroom or laboratory sessions.

**INDIVIDUAL READY RESERVE (IRR)** An individual who receives no pay and is not obligated to drill, conduct annual training, or participate in any military activities until activated by the Presidential Reserve Call-Up Authority.

**INTERVAL PAYMENT** Educational assistance benefits paid during the intervals between terms at a school or between terms when transferring from one school to another while the student is in the same program. Persons on active duty or training at the less than one-half time rate in the preceding term are not entitled to interval payments. The payment of intervals has been eliminated as of August 1, 2011.

**INTERACTIVE VOICE RESPONSE (IVR)** Claimants who must submit monthly verifications of their enrollment may call a toll free telephone number which uses IVR technology to report their attendance. This is done via WAVE (Web Automated Verification of Enrollment).

**INSTITUTION** See Educational Institution.

**INSTITUTION OF HIGHER LEARNING (IHL)** A degree-granting school such as a college or university.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**J**

**JOURNEYMAN** Someone who completed an apprenticeship program and is fully trained in a trade or craft, but who is not yet a master.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**K**

**KICKERS** Amounts contributed by DOD to an education fund on behalf of participants to encourage enlistment or retention in the Armed Forces. The military services may use different terms such as "Army College Fund" or "Navy College Fund", etc. These amounts are added to any other education benefits to which the person may be entitled.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**L**

**LUMP SUM PAYMENT** An amount of educational assistance paid for the entire term, quarter, or semester.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**M**

**MASTER RECORD (M/R)** This is an abbreviation for a BDN master record.

**MASTER RECORD INQUIRY (MINQ)** A BDN command used to look at specific education BDN master records.

**MATRICULATED STUDENT** A college or university student who has satisfied all prerequisites for formal admission and recognition by the institution as a degree-seeking student. This does not mean that an undergraduate student must have formally been accepted into a specific major field of study before he or she may be classified as "matriculated."

**MHA** This is the abbreviation for Monthly Housing Allowance. This is used in Chapter 33 benefits.

**MITIGATING CIRCUMSTANCES** Unforeseen circumstances beyond a claimant's control that prevent him or her from pursuing a program of education.

**MONTGOMERY GI BILL-ACTIVE DUTY (MGIB)** This refers to the Montgomery GI Bill-Active Duty ([chapter 30 of title 38, U.S. Code](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title38/part3/chapter30&edition=prelim)).

**MONTGOMERY GI BILL-SELECTED RESERVE (MGIB-SR)** This refers to the Montgomery GI Bill-Selected Reserve ([chapter 1606 of title 10, U.S. Code](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title10/subtitleE/part4/chapter1606&edition=prelim)).

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**N**

**NATIONAL CALL TO SERVICE (NCS)** An incentive program (benefit) provided to those who perform a period of national service. It is a DOD program that is administered by VA in which participants may choose from a list of incentives (cash bonus of $5,000; repayment of a qualifying student loan not to exceed $18,000; entitlement to allowance equal to the three-year monthly MGIB rate for 12 months; entitlement to allowance equal to 50% of the less-than-three-year MGIB rate for 36 months; coordination with MGIB benefits).

**NON-COLLEGE DEGREE (NCD)** The designation "NCD" is used to refer to a course or program of education or vocational training which does not lead to a standard college degree. Non-college degree training includes programs that produce career-specific diploma or professional certifications. Training is designed to advance an individual’s skills, especially in relation to his or her present or future job. Non-college degree programs include training for jobs that are based on manual or practical activities related to a specific trade, occupation, or vocation. They do not normally include training for a specific profession. Examples of non-college degree training are diploma vocational schools such as HVAC certification, truck driving, EMT certification, or barber/beautician school.

**NON-MATRICULATED STUDENT** A student who is enrolled in courses at an IHL, who either has not completed all prerequisites for admission into a degree program or does not choose to attain recognition as a degree-seeking student.

**NON-PUNITIVE GRADE** Any grade assigned for pursuit of a course, whether upon completion of the course or at the time of withdrawal from the course, which has the effect of excluding the course from any consideration in determining progress toward fulfillment of requirements for graduation. No credit toward the school’s requirements for graduation is granted for such a grade, nor does the grade affect any other criteria for graduation by the policies of the school, such as a grade point average. Therefore, it has the same effect as an audited course.

**NON-STANDARD TERM** A term which is of a shorter or longer length (e.g., weeks and days) than a standard quarter or semester. (See QUARTER, SEMESTER)

**NOTICE OF BASIC ELIGIBILITY (NOBE)** A DD Form 2384, Selected Reserve Educational Assistance Program Notice of Basic Eligibility, which the Selected Reserve member obtains from his or her National Guard or reserve component verifying his or her eligibility to the Montgomery GI Bill-Selected Reserve (MGIB-SR). If available, this form should accompany the reservist's application for benefits.

**NOTICE OF DEATH (NOD)** See FNOD.

**NOTICE OF DISAGREEMENT (NOD)** An abbreviation for the first step in the appellate procedure.

**NOTICE OF EXCEPTION (NOE)** System-generated messages which indicate such things as new information from DOD, award input errors, returned checks, or delinquent certifications.

**NORMAL COMMUTING DISTANCE** Two locations within 55 miles of each other. A branch, extension, or additional facility of a school located more than 55 miles from the school's main campus or parent facility may be considered within normal commuting distance only if school records show that, before the establishment of the additional teaching site, at least 20 students (or 5 percent of the enrollment, whichever is less) on the main campus or parent facility were regularly commuting from the area where the additional teaching site is located; or other comparable evidence clearly shows that students commute regularly between the two locations.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**O**

**ONLINE APPROVAL FILE (OLAF)** The former program which allowed users to review approved program information for an institution. This program is now known as WEAMS.

**ON-THE-JOB TRAINING (OJT)** Training done while performing a job and earning wages. Examples of OJT training include union plumber, hotel management, or firefighter.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**P**

**PAYMENT PROCESSING UNIT (PPU)** A special division of the Hines BDC (Benefits Delivery Center) that modifies chapter 32 master records in certain situations.

**PENDING ISSUE CANCEL (PCAN)** A BDN command used to cancel pending EPCs.

**PENDING ISSUE CHANGE (PCHG)** A BDN command used to change a pending EPC to a different EPC.

**PENDING ISSUE CLEAR (PCLR)** A BDN command used to clear an EPC.

**PENDING ISSUE FILE (PIF)** The information stored in BDN while an EPC is in a pending status.

**PENDING ISSUE INQUIRY (PINQ)** A BDN command used to review the information in a pending EPC.

**POST-9/11 GI BILL (CHAPTER 33)** The Post-9/11 GI Bill provides financial support to service members, veterans, and eligible dependents who attend education or training programs taken at accredited colleges or universities and at accredited schools or programs that do not grant college degrees (non-college degree or NCD programs). To be eligible, individuals must have either at least 90 days of total service on or after September 11, 2001; or a military discharge and a service-connected disability after 30 days of service.

**POWER OF ATTORNEY (POA)** The individual that a claimant has appointed to represent him or her. Generally this is an approved Veterans’ Service Organization but it may be a specific individual.

**PRIMARY INSTITUTION** The institution which will grant the current degree sought, or certifies that the student has completed the program qualifying him or her for the current objective sought.

**PRIOR CREDIT** Credit previously earned and transferred which is creditable to the particular degree or other educational objective being pursued by the Veteran or eligible person.

**PROFESSIONAL OR VOCATIONAL OBJECTIVE** A professional or vocational objective is one that leads to an occupation. It may include educational objectives essential to prepare for the chosen occupation. When a program consists of a series of courses not leading to an educational objective, these courses must be directed toward attainment of a designated professional or vocational objective.

**PROGRAM OF EDUCATION** A combination of subjects, unit courses, or training activities pursued at a school or training establishment which is generally accepted as necessary to meet requirements for a predetermined educational, professional, or vocational objective (e.g., diploma, degree, certificate, occupation).

**PRO-RATE** A term which means to divide or distribute a sum of money proportionately.

**PUNITIVE GRADE** A grade assigned for pursuit of a course which is used in determining the student’s overall progress toward completion of the school’s requirements for graduation. Unlike the non-punitive grade, the punitive grade does affect the criteria to be met by the student for graduation, (i.e., it is a factor in computing the student’s grade average or grade point average).

**PURSUIT** To work, during a certified enrollment period, toward the objective of a program of education. This work must be in accordance with approved institutional policy and applicable criteria of title 38, U.S. Code, and must be necessary to reach the program's objective.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**Q**

**QUARTER** A division of the ordinary school year, usually a period from 10 to 13 weeks long.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

 **R**

****RATE OF PURSUIT**** The number of course hours or credits a student takes at an institution divided by the number of credits considered full-time at that institution. This is usually rounded to the nearest hundredth (if it is .5, round up). Rate of Pursuit is generally only used for chapter 33 benefits.

**REDUCTION IN FORCE (RIF)** An abbreviation showing that the military has released the person from the military unit due to downsizing.

**REFRESHER COURSE** Either a course at the elementary or secondary level to review or update material previously covered in a course that has been satisfactorily completed or a course which permits an individual to update knowledge and skills or be instructed in the technological advances which have occurred in the individual’s field of employment during and since the period of the individual’s active military service.

**REGIONAL PROCESSING OFFICE (RPO)** An abbreviation for the VA office that processes education claims.

**RELEASE FROM ACTIVE DUTY (RAD)** This is an abbreviation for the date that a Veteran was released from active duty.

**REMEDIAL COURSE** A course designed to overcome a deficiency at the elementary or secondary level in a particular area of study, or a handicap, such as in speech.

**REPORTING FEE** A fee paid annually to each educational institution furnishing training under the various VA education programs for required reports or certifications. This fee is intended to help defray the costs of processing various reports and certifications required to be submitted to VA and are in lieu of any other compensation or reimbursement.

**RESEARCH IN ABSENTIA** Research activity necessary for the preparation of the student's master's thesis, doctoral dissertation, or a similar thesis which is a prerequisite to the degree being pursued and is pursued outside a normal classroom setting.

**RESERVE EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM (REAP)** Education program often referred to as [Chapter 1607 of title 10 U.S.C. Code](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title10/subtitleE/part4/chapter1607&edition=prelim). REAP has a sunset date of November 25, 2015. No new applications may be received after that date.

**RESERVIST** A member of a military reserve component.

**RESTORED ENTITLEMENT PROGRAM FOR SURVIVORS (REPS)** A benefit which restores certain Social Security benefits that were reduced or terminated by the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981, Public Law 97-35. Certain survivors of deceased Veterans who died of service-connected causes incurred or aggravated before August 13, 1981, are eligible for benefits.

**RESUME (RESU)** A BDN command used to activate a suspended master record.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**S**

**SCHOOL CERTIFYING OFFICIAL (SCO)** This is the same as a Certifying Official.

**SCHOOL LIABILITY** Liability assessed against a school as a result of the willful or negligent failure of the school to report to VA the discontinuance or interruption of a course, or the willful or negligent false certification by an educational institution.

**SCHOOL YEAR** Generally, a period of 2 semesters or 3 quarters which is not less than 30 nor more than 39 weeks in total length.

**SELECTED RESERVE** The Selected Reserve of the Ready Reserve of any of the reserve components of the Armed Forces of the United States, including the Army Reserve, Naval Reserve, Air Force Reserve, Marine Corps Reserve, Army National Guard and Air National Guard, and the Coast Guard Reserve.

**SEMESTER** A division of the ordinary school year, usually a period from 15 to 19 weeks long.

**SERVICEPERSON** An individual who is currently serving on active duty. Same as "Servicemember."

**SHARE** This application is the gateway into the VETSNET world, which simultaneously establishes a claim control in both the BDN PIF and MAP-D. For Education Service, Payment History Inquiries may be viewed in this program, as well as the eligibility status of Chapter 31 (VR&E) benefits.

**SMALL BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT CENTER (SBDC)** A U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) entity hosted by leading universities and state economic development agencies to provide assistance to small businesses and aspiring entrepreneurs throughout the United States and its territories to realize the dream of business ownership and help existing businesses remain competitive in a complex, ever-changing global marketplace.

**SPECIAL PAYMENT** Expedited payments made when a delay in issuing payment has caused financial hardship for a student.

**STANDARD COLLEGE DEGREE** An associate or higher degree awarded by an IHL that is accredited as a collegiate institution by a recognized regional or national accrediting agency or an IHL that is a candidate for accreditation, or an institution accredited by an agency recognized to accredit specialized degree-level programs.

**STATE APPROVING AGENCY (SAA)** An agency appointed by the Chief Executive of a state to approve programs of education and training for payment of benefits under the various education program laws administered by VA.

**STATUS INQUIRY (SINQ)** A BDN command used to determine the status of a claimant's record in BDN (such as a pending issue or a resulting master record).

**SUMMER SESSION** A division of the summer term specifically designated in a school catalog as a distinct period of instruction. These sessions vary in length, and are often only 3 to 8 weeks long.

**SUMMER TERM** The whole of the period of instruction at a school which takes place between ordinary school years. A summer term may be divided into several summer sessions.

**SUPPLEMENTAL EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE** A benefit payable to a Veteran or Serviceperson as a supplement to his or her basic educational assistance for pursuit of a program of education.

**SUSPEND (SUSP)** A BDN command used to suspend BDN payments.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**T**

****TERM**** This is any regularly established division of the ordinary school year under which a school operates.

**THE IMAGING MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (TIMS)** The electronic folder management system used to maintain all education folders at each RPO.

**TRAINING ESTABLISHMENT** Any establishment providing apprentice or other training on-the-job, including those under the supervision of a college or university or any state department of education, or any state apprenticeship agency, or any state board of vocational education, or any joint apprenticeship committee, or the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training established in accordance with [29 U.S.C., Chapter 4C](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title29/chapter4C&edition=prelim), or any agency of the federal government authorized to supervise such training.

**TRAINING TIME** The rate (i.e., full time or part time) of an eligible person's training that is determined by the number of credit or clock hours the student takes. The training time determines the monthly rate of payment.

**TRANSFER OF EDUCATION BENEFITS (TEB)** The website used by a service member to indicate an irrevocable election to allow a dependent to use his/her education benefits. The TEB website is maintained by the Department of Defense and is viewed through VIS.

**TRANSFEROR** An individual who is entitled to educational assistance under the Post-9/11 GI bill based on his or her own active duty service and who is approved by the military department to transfer all or a portion of his or her entitlement to one or more dependents or transferees.

**TREASURY INQUIRY (TINQ)** A BDN command formerly used to review check and EFT (Electronic Fund Transfer) payment information. This information is now available via SHARE.

**TUTORIAL ASSISTANCE** An allowance paid to eligible persons to supplement their monthly educational assistance. Tutorial assistance may be paid to eligible persons to aid in defraying the expenses incurred by the need for tutoring.

**TWO-YEAR RULE** A minimum period of operation required of some educational institutions to obtain approval of its programs for VA training.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**U**

**UNDERGRADUATE COLLEGE DEGREE** A college or university degree obtained through the pursuit of unit subjects which are below the graduate level. These include associate degrees, bachelor's degrees and first professional degrees.

**UNIFORMED SERVICES** Members of the Unites States Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, and Coast Guard, including the reserve components thereof.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**V**

**VA** United States Department of Veterans Affairs. This may also be abbreviated DVA.

**VA ONCE** A personal computer program that allows school certifying officials to create and transfer enrollment information directly to an RPO for processing.

**VETERAN** A person who served in the active military, naval, or air service. The definition in [38 U.S.C. 1.01(2)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:101 edition:prelim)) requires the person to be discharged or released from service under conditions under than dishonorable. There are different definitions for the term Veteran throughout the regulations. For example, a Veteran under [Chapter 32 of 38 U.S.C.](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title38/part3/chapter32&edition=prelim) is an individual who meets the service requirements for a Veteran as defined in the [38 CFR 21.5040](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4c73d4646f06dc4ddfb21ecc298465e9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15040); and a Veteran under [Chapter 30 of 38 U.S.C.](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title38/part3/chapter30&edition=prelim) is an individual who meets the service requirements for a Veteran under [38 CFR 21.7042](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4c73d4646f06dc4ddfb21ecc298465e9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17042).

**VETERAN APPEALS CONTROL AND LOCATOR SYSTEM (VACOLS)** A unified tracking system for appeals.

**VETERANS ASSISTANCE DISCHARGE SYSTEM (VADS)** A letter-generating system that contains selected DD Form 214 information of discharged Veterans. The information for the VADS record comes from the DD Form 214 and is entered into the system at the Austin DPC (Data Processing Center).

**VETERANS ASSISTANCE INQUIRY (VAI)** An inquiry regarding questioned amounts of VA monetary benefits, or the non-receipt of such benefits after the anticipated claims processing time has elapsed.

**VETERANS BENEFITS ADMINISTRATION (VBA)** The VA organization which processes benefits.

**VETERANS' EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM (VEAP)** A contributory educational assistance program provided for Post-Vietnam Era Veterans under [chapter 32 of title 38, U.S. Code](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title38/part3/chapter32&edition=prelim).

**VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION AND EMPLOYMENT (VR&E)** The VA staff that provides vocational rehabilitation and employment services to Veterans. This is also known as Chapter 31 benefits.

**VONAPP** Veterans On-Line Application

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**W**

**WEB AUTOMATED REFERENCE MATERIAL SYSTEM (WARMS)** An Internet based system for accessing all of VBA's publications.

**WEB AUTOMATED VERIFICATION OF ENROLLMENT (WAVE)** An Internet application which allows claimants to submit monthly verifications of enrollment information.

**WEB ENABLED APPROVAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (WEAMS)** A database for approved educational and job training programs, licensing and certification tests, and national exams maintained in VA corporate environment.

**WORK-IN-PROGRESS (WIPP)** A BDN subsystem that assists management in identifying areas which require attention and analysis.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**Y**

**YELLOW RIBBON PROGRAM (YR)** A program which allows institutions of higher learning (degree-granting colleges and universities) in the United States to voluntarily enter into an agreement with VA to fund tuition expenses that exceed the maximum amount of tuition and fee benefits payable under Chapter 33. Participating schools can waive up to 50% of those expenses, and VA will match the same amount as the institution.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

****48 MONTH RULE (ENTITLEMENT LIMITATION)**** Most individuals eligible for two or more VA education programs may not exceed 48 months of entitlement.

**70/80 PERCENT RULE** If the aggregate service including training is at least 24 months (730-909 days) but less than 30 months (910-1094 days) AND the aggregate service excluding training is at least 18 months (545-729 days) but less than 24 months, the individual will be deemed eligible at the 70% benefit level. This rule only applies to the Post-9/11 GI Bill (Chapter 33).

[Go To Top](#top)