# Part 3: Chapter 3 - Processing Applications for Benefits

**Part 3: Chapter 3 - Processing Applications for Benefits**

[3.01 General](#301)  
  
**[Subchapter 1.](#SI) Basic Concepts**  
[3.02 Overview](#302)  
[3.03 Definitions](#303)  
[3.04 VA Responsibilities](#304)  
[3.05 Time Limits](#305)  
[3.06 Good Cause Consideration](#306)  
  
**[Subchapter 2.](#SII) General Procedures**  
[3.07 Application Forms](#307)  
[3.08 Initial Actions in Claim Processing](#308)  
[3.09 Procedures to Review VA Form 22-1990](#309)  
[3.10 Elections](#310)  
[3.11 Specific Issues Regarding Verification of Service](#311)  
[3.12 Verification of Service - Servicepersons, Veterans, and Dependents](#312)  
[3.13 Development for Additional Required Information](#313)  
[3.14 Statutory Bars and Forfeiture of Benefits](#314)  
[3.15 Character of Discharge](#315)  
  
**[Subchapter 3.](#SIII) Miscellaneous Service Issues**  
[3.16 Service Academy Preparatory Schools and Service Academies](#316)  
[3.17 Deductible Time](#317)  
  
**[Subchapter 4.](#SIV) Training Under Prior Benefit Programs**  
[3.18 General](#318)  
[3.19 Computation for Training under Prior VA Benefit Programs](#319)  
  
**[Subchapter 5.](#SV) Rules of Evidence**  
[3.20 Evidence Requested From Claimant](#320)  
  
**Subchapter 6. Duty To Assist**  
[3.21 Background](#321)  
[3.22 Applying Duty to Assist](#322)  
[3.23 When Not to Apply Duty to Assist](#323)  
[3.24 Steps Taken in Duty to Assist](#324)  
[3.25 When Information Cannot be Obtained](#325)  
[3.26 Reasonable Doubt Rule](#326)  
[3.27 Primary and Secondary Evidence](#327)  
[3.28 Burden of Proof and the Weighing of Evidence](#328)  
[3.29 Photocopies](#329)  
[3.30 New and Relevant Evidence](#330)  
[3.31 Affidavits or Certifications in Support of Claim](#331)

**Figure**   
[3.01 Attachments for Alternative Elections](#F301AttachA)  
[3.02 DTA Denial Letter Template](#F301AttachB)

**3.01  GENERAL**

---

This chapter describes the application forms claimants must use to apply for the education benefits covered in this manual. It also provides procedures and reference material for certain issues that arise in application processing. To review procedures that are unique to a specific benefit, see that part of the manual.

**SUBCHAPTER I.  BASIC CONCEPTS**

**3.02  OVERVIEW**

---

Veteran Claims Examiners (VCEs) must observe certain basic rules which apply to claims and informal claims and the time limits for receipt of evidence. These rules are the same for all education benefits. An individual must file a claim for educational assistance with Veterans Administration (VA). The claim must be in the form prescribed by the Secretary. That list is provided in [section 3.07](#307) of this chapter.

**3.03  DEFINITIONS**

---

VCEs will use these definitions when processing education claims.

**a. Formal Claim.** A claim is considered to be formal when the claimant (or his or her authorized representative) files the claim with VA, and--

(1) it is on the proper form prescribed by the Secretary and

(2) is a request for education assistance or an increase in educational assistance or an extension of the eligibility period for receiving educational assistance.

A “proper form” includes VA Form 22-1990 (paper or electronic) or VA Form 22-5490 (paper or electronic) for original applications.

**b. Informal Claim.** A VCE should consider an informal claim as any written communication from an individual (or an authorized representative) if it indicates intent to apply for educational assistance. Upon receipt of an informal claim, VA will provide an application form to the claimant. If VA receives the application form within one year, VA will consider the claim to have been filed on the date VA received the informal claim.

(1) When VA requests evidence in connection with a claim and the claimant submits the evidence to VA after having abandoned the claim (see definition below), the claimant’s submission of the evidence is an informal claim.

(2) The act of enrolling in an approved school is not an informal claim.

(3) VA will not consider a communication received from a service organization, an attorney, or an agent to be an informal claim if a valid power of attorney, executed by the claimant, is not in effect at the time the communication is written.

**NOTE:** An unsigned application is NOT an informal claim. VCEs should refer to [paragraph 3.09](#309) for policies regarding these applications. VCEs should not confuse a “substantially complete” claim with an informal claim. A claim could be substantially complete, even without a signature. Remember, a signature is not a determining factor for a claim to be considered complete or substantially complete. If an application is not signed, but it is otherwise a complete or substantially complete claim, do not wait for a signature to take action on the claim.

**c. Abandoned Claim**. A claim is abandoned if:

(1) The claimant furnishes additional evidence in connection with a formal claim and the claimant

(a) Does not furnish the evidence within one year of the date of the request; **and**

(b) Does not show good cause why the evidence could not have been submitted within one year of the date of the request;

**OR**

(2) VA requests the claimant file a formal claim after receiving an informal claim and

(a) VA does not receive the formal claim within one year of the date of request; **and**

(b) The claimant does not show good cause why he or she could not have filed the formal claim in sufficient time for VA to have received it within one year of the date of the request.

**NOTE:** The concept of an abandoned claim does not apply to service information or kickers received at a later time.

**d. Date of Claim.** The date of claim is the date on which a valid claim or application for educational assistance is filed with VA.

(1) The date of claim is the date VA received an informal claim if the informal claim had been filed and VA received a formal claim within one year of the date that VA requested it (or within such other time limit set by [38 CFR 21.1032](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_11032)).

(2) If a claim is abandoned, the date of claim is the date a new formal claim is received or the date of an informal claim which meets the requirements of subparagraph (1) above.

**EXAMPLE:** An informal claim is received on 01/03/15 (in this situation the claim was for benefits written on a napkin). The electronic form 22-V1990 was not received until 12/27/15 the date of claim would be December 27, 2015. However, for payment purposes, the date of the informal claim protects how far back VA can pay benefits to this claimant.

**3.04  VA RESPONSIBILITIES**

---

VA has certain responsibilities when an individual files a claim for education benefits ([38 CFR 21.1031](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_11031)).

a. Furnishing Forms. VA will send any necessary claim forms to an individual when he or she files an informal claim for education benefits. VA will also furnish appropriate instructions and, if appropriate, a description of any supporting evidence required to complete the informal claim.

b. Requesting Additional Evidence. If the formal claim is incomplete or if VA requires additional evidence or information to make a determination on the claim, VA will notify the claimant of the evidence or information that VA needs to make such determination. This notification will include the one year time limit provision.

**NOTE:** In compliance with Duty To Assist, VCEs will review and request additional evidence within 5 working days the document (claim token) has been assigned to them. Diligence is required to ensure documents are reviewed in a timely manner.

**3.05  TIME LIMITS**

---

a. If a claimant’s application is incomplete, the VCE will notify the claimant of the evidence necessary to complete the claim. Payment of education assistance will not be allowed if the evidence is not received within one year from the date of such notification.

b. Computation of Time Limit

(1) In computing the time limit for any action required of a claimant or beneficiary, including the filing of claims or evidence requested by VA, exclude the first day of the specified period, and include the last day ([38 CFR 21.1033(f)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=7ac69e584da9c2a29586b97d818956b4&mc=true&node=se38.2.21_11033&rgn=div8)). This rule is applicable in cases in which the time limit expires on a workday. When the time limit would expire on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, include the next succeeding workday in the computation.

(2) The first day of the specified period referred to in subparagraph (1) will be the date of the letter of notification to the claimant or beneficiary which establishes a time limit.

**3.06  GOOD CAUSE CONSIDERATION**

---

When a claimant has been unable to provide additional evidence to complete his/her claim within the one year time frame, VA should consider the existence of good cause if the claimant provides the needed information after the one year.

a. Definition of “Good Cause”. Examples of good cause include, but are not limited to extended illness, death in the immediate family, and documented inability to obtain evidence from a third party. The claimant must explain how the circumstances prevented him or her from acting within the time limit. The VCE should exercise care that inability to act for an entire year is demonstrated.

**EXAMPLE:** A claimant applies for Chapter 33 on August 1, 2013, with an enrollment certification beginning August 1, 2013. However, the claimant fails to submit a relinquishment for a non-Chapter 33 benefit. VA sends notice to the claimant requesting relinquishment of a non-Chapter 33 benefit and suspends the claim for 30 days. The claimant does not supply a relinquishment within the 30 days, but has a good-cause for extension which is granted for up to 1 year. The claimant then sends in relinquishment 14 months later on October 1, 2014. VA may pay back 1 year from the date of relinquishment, as far back as October 1, 2013, because the 12 month good-cause extension expired on August 1, 2014.

b. Evidence Received Without Claim for Good Cause Extension. If the claimant submits the evidence after the one year time limit but does not specifically request an extension of the one year time limit for good cause, apply the following procedures:

**EXAMPLE:** Veteran is currently enrolled and entitled to additional dependency allowance. The VCE should adjust the award to include the dependents from the date that the evidence was received. If no current action can be taken on the evidence, VCE should place a FLASH in the claimant’s TIMS folder to alert the next VCE there is additional evidence for future award actions. VCE should notify the claimant of the action taken.

Insert the following paragraph into the development letter:

|  |
| --- |
| The evidence we requested on (date) was not received within one year. We can consider this evidence as being timely filed only if you can show good cause for why you could not respond in a timely manner. Basically, you should state why you could not send this evidence within the one year time limitation set by law. You should state specifically what happened and when it happened. Upon your request for good cause extension and information concerning why you could not send the evidence within the one-year time limitation, we will consider extending the time limit by which the evidence should have been received. You should provide your request for an extension and your explanation within the next 30 days. It must be received within one year from the date of this letter to be considered for extension. |

VCEs should place the claim token in AWAIT Mail for 30 days and extend the supplemental end product for 30 days.

If the evidence is received within 30 days, and the VCE can accept the reason the claimant says he could not respond within the original time frame, correct the award and send appropriate award letter.

If the VCE cannot accept the reason, VCE should PCLR the end product and send denial letter specifying why the good cause reason was not accepted.

If the evidence is not received within 30 days, the VCE should PCLR the end product and send a denial letter explaining the information requested was not received within 30 days and therefore the prior award action is complete. Attach a 4107 to this denial letter. Claimants can appeal the denial of a time limit extension independently from other issues.

c. Good Cause Extension Claims. VCEs should accept a claim for a good cause extension if the following elements are met:

(1) The requested evidence is received before or at the same time as the request for extension.

(2) The original time limit has expired. If a claimant requests an extension of time based on good cause before the original time limit has expired, The VCE should advise the claimant that the claim for extension will be considered after the evidence is submitted.

**NOTE:** The good cause explanation must always cover the entire period up to the date the requested evidence is received.

d. Good Cause Statement and Evidence. The VCE should accept a claimant's statement as to the facts alleged concerning the good cause without additional development unless there is contradictory evidence of record. A claimant does not have to submit evidence substantiating the statement.

e. Administrative Decision. If good cause has been claimed, VCEs should prepare an administrative decision on all claims which qualify for good cause extensions. (Refer to Part 3, Chapter 2). The discussion section of the decision must address whether good cause has been shown and whether the length of the extension requested is reasonable. This administrative decision is necessary whether the good cause is granted or not.

**SUBCHAPTER II.  GENERAL PROCEDURES**

 

**3.07 APPLICATION FORMS**

---

**NOTE:** Photocopies of original claims are acceptable. This is especially important in certain situations such as when a claimant is overseas.

To make a formal claim for benefits, an individual must use the correct application form.

|  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **Application Form** | **Benefit** | **Beneficiary** |
| VA Form 22-1990, 22-1990e, 22-1990n or VONAPP 1990 | Chapters 30, 32, 33, 1606, National Call to Service and Section 903. | Any Veteran or Service Member, or Section 903 dependents wishing to apply for Education benefits |
| VA Form 22-1990t | Chapters 30, 32, 33, 1606, and Section 903 | Claimants that want to receive tutorial assistance |
| VA Form 22-1995 and VONAPP-1995 | Chapters 30, 32, 33, 1606, and Section 903 | Used by beneficiaries to request a change or program or training (Refer to Chapter 4 for additional information) |
| VA Form 22-5490 or VONAPP 5490 | Chapter 35 or Ch33 Fry Scholarship | This form is used by spouses and children to apply for benefits under Chapter 35 or Chapter 33 for the Master Gunnery Sergeant Fry Scholarship under Post 9/11 GI Bill. |
| VA Form 22-5495 or VONAPP 5495 | Chapter 35 or Ch33 Fry Scholarship | Used by beneficiaries to request a change or program or training (Refer to Chapter 4 for additional information). |
| VA Form 22-8889 | Section 901 | Veterans, Service members, and dependents who wish to apply for Section 901 under PL 96-342 |
| VA Form 22-0848 | Chapter 33 | Application for Rural Relocation Benefit under the Post 9/11 GI Bill |
| VA-Form 22-5281 | Chapter 32 | Participants who are requesting a refund of their Chapter 32 contributions. |

**3.08 INITIAL ACTIONS IN CLAIM PROCESSING**

---

**a. Duty to Assist.** VCEs must extend all reasonable assistance to claimants in meeting the evidentiary requirements necessary to establish their claims under the applicable laws and regulations. VCEs must give claimants every opportunity to establish entitlement to the benefits sought, to include complete procedural and appellate rights. VCEs must use plain language in any communication with claimants.

**b. Date-of-Receipt Stamp.** All paper mail should be date stamped upon receipt in the Regional Office (RO) mailroom.

(1) Do not affix stamps directly on original documents which are to be returned such as discharge certificates, court records and papers, marriage, birth and death certificates, divorce decrees and similar records. Make a copy of the document, date stamp the copy and prepare the original document for return to the sender.

(2) Do not routinely require the use of a date stamp in the Education Division, but, if an unstamped document is received in Education, the approved designated official should stamp it as soon as possible. This protects the date of claim for the claimant.

(3) The Education Officer or designee, not below the grade of Supervisory VCE (GS-13), may require the use of the receipt stamp to document unusual delays in the receipt of documents in the division.

**c. Initial Screening.** Review all applications, claims, correspondence and evidence immediately to determine if the claim is truly an Education related document. If not an Education document, follow local RPO procedures to ensure the document is delivered to the appropriate division or agency.

**d. Signature of Claimant.** With the exception of a child not of legal age applying for Dependent's Education Assistance (DEA) (Chapter 35) benefits, a signature is not required when applying for Education benefits. When using an electronic version of VA Form 22-1990, the submission electronically suffices for the signature. When a paper application is received, a signature will be required but it will not prohibit the determining of eligibility.

**e. Disposition of Claims.** If a formal claim is received, either a Certificate of Eligibility (COE) must be issued or an award must be authorized. A disallowance is considered an award.

**f. Recording End Products.** VCEs are entitled to an end product only after final action is taken on all pending issues on the claim. [M22-3, Manpower Control and Utilization Education Activities,](http://www.warms.vba.va.gov/M22_3.html) lists the end products for education claims processing.

**3.09 PROCEDURES TO REVIEW VA FORM 22-1990**

---

**NOTE:** A VA Form 22-1990 received electronically is presumed appropriately signed by virtue of submission.

**a. Unsigned Paper Application Procedures:**

(1) Unsigned application - claimant is eligible. The VCE should issue a Certification of Eligibility (COE) (use PCGL(Personal Computer Generated Letter) AWD(Award)-1) with appellate rights. In addition to other appropriate actions, the VCE should advise the claimant that VA can’t award benefits until his or her signature is received. VCE should flash the claimant’s TIMS folder that a signature is necessary before an award can be processed. VCEs should take the end product and finish the token. When additional documents reactivate the token, do the following:

A. If the signature is submitted prior to the receipt of a VA Form 22-1999, delete the Flash. No further action needs to be taken until VA Form 22-1999 is received. PCAN the end product and finish the token.

B. If a VA Form 22-1999 is received prior to receipt of the claimant’s signature, but *within* 30 days of the date of the COE, control the claim until the signature is received, then process the claim. If the signature is not received within 30 days from the date of the COE, deny the claim and attach appellate rights. In the denial letter, be sure to include another request for the claimant’s signature with the denial. Take the end product and finish the token.

C. If a VA Form 22-1999 is received prior to receipt of the claimant’s signature but more than 30 days after the date of the COE, deny the claim and attach appellate rights. In the denial letter, be sure to include another request for the claimant’s signature with the denial. Take the end product and finish the token.

D. If more VA Form 22-1999s are received after a claim has been denied (as above) and no signature has been received, no further action should be taken. PCAN the end product and finish the token.

(2) Unsigned application - development is needed to determine eligibility. VCEs must attempt to obtain the information through initial development (from Department of Defense (DoD), the school, Defense Finance and Accounting System (DFAS), etc.). Control the claim for receipt of the requested information or documentation.

A. If the initial development for necessary information required to make the eligibility determination isn’t successful, apply Duty to Assist procedures, as appropriate. (Refer to subchapter 6 for additional information).

B. When developing for the information needed to make an eligibility determination, include a request for the claimant’s signature in the development letter. VCEs should include in the letter a reminder that until his or her signature is received, VA can’t award benefits even if the claimant’s eligibility is established. This will prevent further delays when a VA Form 22-1999 is received.

C. If the information required to make the eligibility determination is received, but the signature hasn’t been received, proceed as stated above.

(3) Unsigned application – claimant not eligible. If the claimant isn’t eligible, disallow the claim in the system and issue the appropriate letter. Take the end product and finish the token.

**b. Type of Benefit.** VCEs must either allow or deny each benefit claimed on an application. In addition, if the beneficiary is not eligible for, eligibility ends or has ended under the benefit requested, the VCE should review eligibility under other benefits included on the application received. If eligible for another benefit, a Certificate of Eligibility (COE) should be issued, and/or award payment (if enrollment is on file and the term is payable). If the beneficiary is eligible for multiple benefits, the VCE should develop to the beneficiary for appropriate choice and finish the claim token [(See Part 4, Chapter 1, 1.00(a)(3)).](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073421/Part%204:%20Chapter%201%20-%20Enrollment%20Certification) The VCE should not control the claim for development in this situation. 

If the beneficiary is only eligible for a benefit found on a different application, the VCE should process the current application as a denial, develop for the correct application and close the claim. **The VCE cannot process a potential claim for a benefit if a different application has to be filed by the beneficiary.**

**EXAMPLE 1:** A beneficiary submits VA Form 22-1990 for chapter 30 benefits. Eligibility was granted for chapter 30 and the beneficiary began using entitlement. While using chapter 30 benefits for their Spring enrollment period, their entitlement exhausted at the end of (or during) the term. The beneficiary is now only eligible for chapter 33 benefits. Since the application for chapter 33 is the same application used for chapter 30 (VA Form 22-1990), the VCE should now issue a COE for chapter 33, and/or award payment if any enrollment period under chapter 30 was left unpaid.

**NOTE:** Chapter 30 and chapter 33 entitlement can be extended until the end of term, if exhaustion occurs during a term and the beneficiary has not used more than 48 months of combined benefits under multiple VA education programs.

Therefore, VCEs should always calculate total entitlement used (including any end of term extensions) when determining the “Prior VA Entitlement”, upon processing eligibility from chapter 30, chapter 33, or chapter 1606 to the next eligible benefit, as appropriate.

**EXAMPLE 2:** A beneficiary submits VA Form 22-1990 for chapter 33 benefits. Student has already used 36 months under chapter 33 and relinquished chapter 1606. He has a few months of entitlement remaining under chapter 30. The VCE would deny the claim for chapter 33 as entitlement exhausted but send a COE with information regarding chapter 30. If VA Form 22-1999 has been received, payment may be authorized under chapter 30 in this scenario.

**EXAMPLE 3:** Beneficiary submits VA Form 22-5490 and applies for chapter 35. The VCE denies chapter 35, but notices that beneficiary is eligible for chapter 33 Transfer of Entitlement (TOE) benefits. The VCE should edit the chapter 35 denial letter to explain that possible chapter 33 TOE eligibility exists, and they should reapply, using VA Form 22-1990E (Application for Family Member to Use Transferred Benefits).

**3.10  ELECTIONS**

---

There are two separate and distinct types of elections claimants must make:

* A time in service (TIS) Election is an election to point a period of time in service to one benefit instead of another.
* An In lieu of (ILO) Election is an election to forfeit one benefit in order to qualify for chapter 33. The ILO election has two distinct parts:

1. benefit to forfeit, and;
2. the effective date of the forfeiture

These two types of elections have two different sets of rules for VCEs to follow to ensure the claimant makes the appropriate election.

**a. Differences in Election types.**

(1) TIS election. A specific period(s) of time in service used towards establishing eligibility for a benefit. Once a period of time in service has been applied toward a specific benefit, that period of time may not be used again to establish eligibility for another benefit. “Time in service” in this context refers to a period of time in service that may be either a whole or portion of an obligated service period. **See Perkins information in section below**. This applies to any service periods considered in claims processed on or after August 1, 2011. 

(2) ILO election. An ILO election is generally optional when the election would be advantageous. An ILO election may be required under chapter 33 benefits in coordination with chapter 30 in limited situations. **See Perkins information in section below**. 

**b. Point of Irrevocability.**

(1) TIS Election. The issuance of the first payment makes this election irrevocable. A beneficiary may make a change in the election of benefits after a Certification of Eligibility (COE) has been issued provided NO payment has been released.

(2) ILO Election. The issuance of the COE makes this election irrevocable. Payment is not a factor for an ILO election.

**EXAMPLE:** A Service member applies for chapter 30 benefits, receives a COE, then decides they should have applied for chapter 33 benefits prior to receiving payment for benefits under chapter 30 because they will not be able to convert later based on lack of “lengthy” service (see Perkins section below for discussion of “lengthy”). Since this is an example of a time in service election, the beneficiary may make the change of elections since the payment has not been issued.

**c. Availability of “alternative election” (**[**38 USC 3327(h)**](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:3327%20edition:prelim)%20OR%20(granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3327)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true)**;**[**Section 405 of Public Law 114-315**](https://www.congress.gov/114/plaws/publ315/PLAW-114publ315.pdf)**).**

(1) TIS election is NOT AVAILABLE for an alternative election. 

(2) ILO election. VA may elect on behalf of the service member or Veteran and may modify the effective date.  A TOE approval date cannot be modified.

**d. Use of Alternative Elections.**VA has the authority to make an alternative election (forfeited benefit and/oreffective date of forfeiture) on behalf of an individual that failed to make an election or submitted an election on or after January 1, 2017, that was not in their best interest.

As a general rule, VA will not exercise this authority to override a valid election.  However, an alternative election will be appropriate under limited circumstances, or when required for coordination of chapter 33 and chapter 30 benefits. This authority eliminates the need to develop for valid benefit forfeiture or the need to gain prior authorization to alter the effective date of the benefit forfeiture.

**NOTE:** If the Veteran is deceased and was eligible for more than one benefit other than chapter 33 at the time the transfer of entitlement was approved, special consideration will be required if the available transferred entitlement would be diminished (chapter 30) and/or the Veteran’s eligibility included a kicker (chapter 30/1606).

**e. Processing Steps for Alternative Election.**

**See Perkins information in section below.**

**f. Disagreement with VA’s alternative election.**

(1) If the beneficiary's response is timely (within 30 days of the claimant’s receipt of VA’s notice), the VCE should replace the alternative election with the election provided in the beneficiary’s response. If the beneficiary insists on an election that VA has determined to be not in the best interest of the beneficiary, the VCE must process the claim in accordance with the beneficiary’s request for benefits. The VCE does not have the authority to override a beneficiary’s response disagreeing with VA’s alternative election. If the claimant continues to insist on an election which is disadvantageous or invalid, then the VCE will process accordingly, including but not limited to, denial of the claim.

(2) Although the beneficiary only has 30 days to disagree with the alternative election, VA will only enforce this limitation if benefits have already been paid based on VA’s alternative election. In other words, so long as benefits have NOT been paid, the VCE will change the election VA made to the election requested by the beneficiary in his or her response regardless of how much time has passed. However, once a payment is made based on the alternative election, VA will enforce the 30-day limitation.

VCEs should be accommodating towards the beneficiary in the enforcement of the limitation. If there is a question as to whether the beneficiary’s response was received timely, the VCE should carefully review the timeline and consider any extenuating circumstances. When a reasonable argument can be made that the beneficiary had not received VA’s notice or VA received a notice “shortly” after the 30-day period, the VCE should accept the request of the beneficiary. The VCE should be mindful that the 30-day period begins when the beneficiary “receives” the notification. Extra time should be allotted for delivery of the paper notification. The VCE should always document in the TIMS file in a NOTE with a clear explanation or justification with any request received after 30 days from the date of the original notification. Any notice to VA received after a payment has been made, based on VA’s alternative election and AFTER 45 days without an acceptable justification, will be considered too late. A beneficiary who responds within one year from any VA decision, maintains the right to appeal and may submit a notice of disagreement to appeal VA’s decision.

**g. Additional Examples and Comments regarding Alternative Elections.**

(1) Modify TOE effective date. The VCE cannot change an effective date on an election when the election is connected to a transfer of benefits.

(2) Retroactive Changes. As previously stated, in general, a VCE should not make an alternative election after a claim has been adjudicated. However, provided that the original claim for chapter 33 was submitted on or after January 1, 2017, the VCE may make an alternative election that is “clearly in the best interest of the individual” up until benefits have been paid. The VCE should not apply this provision once education benefits have been paid to an individual that provided an election. **Exception:**The alternative election should have been made when the claim was previously processed in order to ensure benefit coverage of the training. In this case, retroactively making the alternative election is considered a correction to previous processing even if the beneficiary has already been paid.

(3) Reversing an alternative election and creating overpayment. The VCE may choose an earlier effective date than the one originally elected by the beneficiary. However, an overpayment would result from a beneficiary choosing to get no benefits for the term instead of getting benefits for the term. This example is extremely rare. However, if a beneficiary responds and requests such a change, it is very likely that the beneficiary may have failed to understand the explanation provided in the letter. Before processing such a change, the VCE should contact the beneficiary electronically and make one last effort to explain the impact of the beneficiary’s choice. If the beneficiary still chooses this course of action, then the VCE should proceed with processing and releasing the debt. This is not considered to be administrative error because VA’s decision to make the original payment was correct at the time and the debt was created due to a choice made by the beneficiary. If the beneficiary wishes to change his or her mind and agree with VA’s alternative election, annotate the TIMS file accordingly and instruct the claimant to submit the change in writing (preferably through Ask VA).

**h. Other Election Examples.** As stated previously, there are specific times when an election is required on the beneficiary’s application. Beneficiaries using an electronic version of VA Form 22-1990 must select a benefit. If the beneficiary has used a paper version of VA Form 22-1990, the VCE may have to assist the beneficiary with the decision. Remember, an election is no longer required prior to paying benefits when no specific benefit is requested, and the claimant is eligible for multiple benefits based upon sufficient **aggregate service to fully vest multiple benefits**.

(1) No Benefit Checked and Not Eligible for any Benefits

If a beneficiary does not check a specific benefit on the application form and is not eligible for any benefit, the VCE must deny each benefit to which the Veteran is not entitled. The VCE is entitled to an original work credit for each disallowed claim.

**NOTE:**The VCE should only deny those benefits to which the beneficiary would have had potential eligibility. Typically, a disallowance for chapter 32 would no longer be necessary as the applicant would not have served during the appropriate time period.

(2) No Benefit Checked and Eligible for Multiple Benefits

If a beneficiary does not check a specific benefit on the application and is eligible for more than one benefit, and a required election is not received, the VCE will do the following:

(A) When TIS or ILO does not apply, award eligibility under all benefits entitled. Do not deny benefits not entitled.

(B) When a TIS or ILO election applies, the VCE should send the claimant a development letter fully informing them of eligibility for all potential benefits and request an election.

(C) The VCE should control in AWAIT mail in TIMS for 30 days. If after 30 days no election is received, the VCE should deny the claim as failure to furnish and send the appropriate letter. 

(3) Beneficiary Selects Multiple Benefits and is Eligible for More than one Benefit

Follow instruction for (2) above and deny any selected benefit not entitled.

(4) Beneficiary Selects One Benefit, is not Eligible for Selected Benefit, but is Eligible for two or more others.

If a beneficiary selects one benefit and is not eligible for it, but is eligible for two or more others, the VCE should deny the benefit for which the claimant applied. Follow instructions for (2) above.

**NOTE:** As a reminder, VCEs may only accept written confirmation for elections covered in section 3.10. Examples of a written confirmation include a letter, entry on an application, an “Ask VA” inquiry, or by other electronic means including email provided the election is complete, identifiable, and in response to a development request. Telephonic elections are not acceptable.

While section 3.10 concerns elections in general, this section does not apply to chapter 35. VCEs may accept chapter 35 elections telephonically. VA must provide written notice and acknowledgement.

**i. Rudisill and Perkins**

**Introduction**

On April 16, 2024, the Supreme Court of the United States issued a decision in Rudisill v. McDonough. The Supreme Court held that a veteran who qualified for multiple educational benefits through separate periods of service may use either set of benefits, in any order, up to the 48-month aggregate-benefits cap. The Court further held that an election to receive Post-9/11 GI Bill (chapter 33) benefits under 38 U.S.C. § 3327 is only required when “coordination” of Montgomery GI Bill – Active Duty (chapter 30) and chapter 33 entitlement is necessary under § 3322(d).

On May 16, 2025, the United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims issued a precedential decision in Perkins v. Collins, Vet. App. No. 24-6515, holding that “a veteran whose single period of service is long enough to qualify for benefits under both the [chapter 30] and [chapter 33] programs, without using any period of time twice to establish eligibility, is entitled to receive benefits under both programs up to a statutory 48-month cap on such educational benefits.”

Under Perkins, a single period of obligated service may be used to establish eligibility under multiple benefit programs as long as no time within that service is double-counted. Perkins also concluded that the August 1, 2011, effective date of § 3322(h)(1) is not applied based on service dates, but instead, based on the date of the election to credit service.

Therefore, only Veterans with a single period of qualifying active-duty service which is insufficient in length to establish entitlement to both chapter 30 and 33 while respecting § 3322(h)(1)’s bar to duplication (i.e., not double-counting any time in service), who have previously used entitlement under chapter 30 and remain eligible for chapter 30 benefits as of the date of their application for chapter 33 will be required to make an election under § 3327 to establish chapter 33 benefits.

All other beneficiaries may make a *voluntary* election under § 3327 to receive a chapter 1606 or 30 kicker under § 3316 and § 3327(g), and/or a refund of chapter 30 contributions under § 3327(f). This voluntary election can be made at any time, and the lack of said election is not a bar to eligibility under chapter 33.

**NOTE 1:** When an election is required, the effective date of the election is up to one year prior to the date of claim of the application by a service member or Veteran, through the date of claim (whatever is most advantageous) **or** on the approval date of transferred benefits (“Transfer Request Date” as displayed in VIS), when approved prior to an application submitted by the service member or Veteran. 

**NOTE 2:** VA is updating its automated adjudication systems to apply Perkins v. Collins. Until the automated systems are updated, the automated decisions processed by VA can only apply Rudisill v. McDonough. However, to ensure that no current or recent student runs out of benefits while VA updates its automated systems, VA will manually adjudicate priority claims.  All manual adjudications must apply both Rudisill and Perkins using the Perkins v. Collins processing guidelines.   

The deprecated processing guidelines for Rudisill v. McDonough are located in the Archives section of this Part. **These Rudisill processing guidelines are for reference only and should no longer be applied to manual processing.**

**Bar to Duplication and Assignment of Time in Service**

As discussed in the Introduction of this section, the bar to duplication established by § 3322(h)(1) prevents a Veteran from using the same time in service to qualify for multiple benefits. This means that portions of time within a single obligated service period may be used to establish or increase eligibility under multiple benefits as long as no portion of time in service is double counted. 36 months plus 90 days is required in most cases to establish entitlement to both chapter 30 and chapter 33 benefits.

After application of the bar to duplication, in many cases, 66 months of service will be required to establish *full* entitlement to both benefits (full chapter 30 and 100% rate for chapter 33), assuming an Expiration Term of Service discharge. 72 months of service or greater will establish full entitlement to both benefits regardless of separation reason. Special circumstances, such as award of Purple Heart or covered discharges for Disability may allow for the establishment of full entitlement with less months of service than described above.

If a beneficiary has a service period or service periods sufficient in length to establish full entitlement under both chapter 30 and 33 without crediting the same day of service to both benefits, credit the service in a manner which allows for the most retroactive coverage, based on the date of claim and benefit requested.

Ex: Beneficiary originally enlisted for six years of active-duty service, served from January 1, 2018, to December 31, 2024, and was released from active duty with an Honorable character of discharge and separation reason of Expiration Term of Service. Chapter 33 is requested on an application dated August 1, 2025.

36 months of active-duty service is required to establish chapter 33 at 100%, and 30 months of active-duty service is required to establish chapter 30 due to the ETS separation. The beneficiary served a total of 72 months, meaning they can establish full entitlement to both benefits without crediting the same day of service to both benefits. To provide full retroactive coverage at the greatest benefit level under the benefit requested (chapter 33), apply the first 36 months of service to chapter 33, January 1, 2018, to December 31, 2020, establishing 100% benefit level as of December 31, 2020. Apply the remainder of the service to chapter 30, January 1, 2021, to December 31, 2024.

If a beneficiary has sufficient service to establish entitlement under both benefits but insufficient service to establish full entitlement, develop to the beneficiary for assignment of periods of time in service to each benefit. In most cases, this election will be the choice to receive full chapter 30 entitlement, plus chapter 33 entitlement at a reduced benefit level, **or** full chapter 33 entitlement and no chapter 30 entitlement. Covered discharges may allow for full chapter 33 entitlement and reduced chapter 30 entitlement. In the future, Education Service plans to collect this election during the application process if it is determined the beneficiary has insufficient service to establish full entitlement to both benefits.

**Claims Processing Scenarios**

*Veteran is eligible for chapter 33 and chapter 1606.*

An election to give up chapter 1606 benefits is no longer required to establish eligibility under chapter 33. The beneficiary may wish to voluntarily relinquish chapter 1606 benefits to receive a chapter 1606 kicker under chapter 33.

1. 1. Veteran is eligible for a chapter 1606 kicker:
      1. No alternative election is needed. Process claim with no relinquishment.
      2. If chapter 1606 was previously used, enter the amount of entitlement used into DGI, but do not check the “Eligible” checkbox.
      3. Add letter insert in “Attachment A – Ch1606 and Ch33, no Ch30” to the veteran’s notification letter immediately following the introduction paragraph:
         1. Select the “Regarding Your Election” paragraph indicating that no election was received.
         2. Select the “What We Did” paragraph indicating that an election was not made and there is a kicker.
      4. Do not control the claim for a response from the beneficiary.
   2. Veteran is *not* eligible for a chapter 1606 kicker:
      1. No alternative election is needed. Process claim with no relinquishment.
      2. If chapter 1606 was previously used, enter the amount of entitlement used into DGI, but do not check the “eligible” checkbox.
      3. No letter insert is needed.

*Veteran is eligible for chapter 33 and chapter 30 but does not have time in service of sufficient length to establish entitlement to both benefits.*

An election to give up chapter 30 benefits is *only* required to establish eligibility under chapter 33 when there is only one period of qualifying active-duty service which is of insufficient length to establish the time-in-service requirements for both benefits, and the veteran used chapter 30 benefits before the chapter 33 application.

In scenarios other than the above, the Veteran may wish to voluntarily relinquish chapter 30 benefits to coordinate the payment of a chapter 30 kicker and/or receive a refund of their chapter 30 contributions under chapter 33.

1. 1. For cases where Veteran’s election is required:
      1. Process claim with an alternative election.
      2. If chapter 30 was previously used, enter the amount of entitlement used into DGI and check the “Eligible” checkbox. Add relinquishment and kicker data.
      3. Replace the “What We Did” section of the letter with the language in “Attachment C – Updated Alternative Election Language.”
   2. For cases where no election is required, but Veteran is eligible for a chapter 30 kicker:
      1. Process claim with no relinquishment. No alternative election is needed.
      2. If chapter 30 was previously used, enter the amount of entitlement used into DGI but do not check the “Eligible” checkbox.
      3. Add letter insert in “Attachment B – Ch30 and Ch33, Bar to Duplication” to the veteran’s notification letter, immediately following the introduction paragraph:
         1. Select the “Regarding Your Election” paragraph indicating that an election was not received.
         2. Select the “What We Did” paragraph indicating that an election was not received and kicker exists.
   3. For cases where no election is required, and Veteran is *not* eligible for a chapter 30 kicker:
      1. Process claim with no relinquishment. No alternative election is needed.
      2. If chapter 30 was previously used, enter the amount of entitlement used into DGI, but do not check the “eligible” checkbox.
      3. No letter insert is needed.

*Veteran is eligible for chapter 33 and chapter 30 and has lengthy service or multiple qualifying periods of service.*

When a beneficiary has lengthy service (generally 36 months plus 90 days or greater) or multiple qualifying periods of service, an election to relinquish chapter 30 is no longer required to establish chapter 33. The beneficiary may wish to voluntarily relinquish chapter 30 benefits to coordinate the payment of a chapter 30 kicker and/or receive a refund of their chapter 30 contributions under chapter 33.

1. 1. Veteran’s benefit level would be increased by making an election and crediting all service to chapter 33 **and/or** is eligible for a chapter 30 kicker:
      1. Process claim with **no** relinquishment.
      2. If chapter 30 was previously used, enter the amount of entitlement used into DGI, but do not check the “Eligible” checkbox.
      3. Service which is not being credited towards chapter 33 eligibility must be entered into DGI as non-qualifying service with a reason of “Used for Other Benefit”.
      4. Add letter insert in “Attachment D – Ch30 and Ch33, Lengthy or Multiple Periods of Service” to the veteran’s notification letter, immediately following the introduction paragraph:
         1. Select the “Regarding Your Election” paragraph indicating that an election was not received.
         2. Select the “What We Did” paragraph indicating that an election was not received and kicker exists or the benefit level could be increased.
   2. Veteran is 100% without the election and *not* eligible for a chapter 30 kicker:
      1. Process claim with no relinquishment. No alternative election is needed.
      2. If chapter 30 was previously used, enter the amount of entitlement used into DGI, but do not check the “eligible” checkbox.
      3. Service which is not being credited towards chapter 33 eligibility must be entered into DGI as non-qualifying service with a reason of “Used for Other Benefit”.
      4. No letter insert is needed.

*Veteran is eligible for chapter 33, chapter 30, and chapter 1606.*

When a beneficiary is eligible for all three benefits, no election is required. No election will be made, even if provided on the application. The beneficiary may wish to voluntarily relinquish a benefit to coordinate the payment of a kicker and/or receive a refund of their chapter 30 contributions under chapter 33.

In these cases:

1. Process claim with **no** relinquishment.
2. If entitlement was previously used, enter the amount of entitlement used into DGI, but do not check the “Eligible” checkbox.
3. Service which is not being credited towards chapter 33 eligibility must be entered into DGI as non-qualifying service with a reason of “Used for Other Benefit”.
4. Add letter insert in “Attachment E – Ch30, Ch1606, and Ch33” to the veteran’s notification letter, immediately following the introduction paragraph:
   1. Select the appropriate “Regarding Your Election” paragraph indicating whether or not an election was received.
   2. Select all appropriate “What We Found” paragraph(s).

*TOE Claims*

If the request is for benefits under the Transfer of Entitlement (TOE) provision:

1. 1. Follow the scenario which is applicable to the veteran sponsor.
   2. Assume no election has been made, unless the veteran has applied for benefits in their own right.
   3. Ensure proper notification is provided to the veteran, as described above.

**NOTE:** When processing non-chapter 33 claims, an ILO election is generally not required. Transferred benefits to dependents or any used entitlement must be accounted for as prior used entitlement when establishing eligibility.

*Fry Claims*

If the request is for benefits under the Fry Scholarship provision:

1. 1. If the beneficiary has served in the Armed Forces, and is eligible for a non-chapter 33 benefit other than chapter 35:
      1. An election to relinquish the non-chapter 35 benefit is not required. Do not develop for this election.
      2. The election between chapter 35 and Fry Scholarship detailed in § 3322(h)(2), is still required for deaths occurring on or after August 1, 2011.
   2. If the beneficiary has not served in the Armed Forces:
      1. The election between chapter 35 and Fry Scholarship detailed in § 3322(h)(2), is still required for deaths occurring on or after August 1, 2011.

**NOTE: Letter inserts available in the attachments section below.**

**3.11  SPECIFIC ISSUES REGARDING VERIFICATION OF SERVICE**

---

**a. Determining Active Duty.** Determining what is or is not "active duty" can be a complex issue. The terms "active duty," "ACDUTRA" (Active Duty for Training), and "Selected Reserve" have very specific meanings previously defined in [PART 01, GENERAL. CHAPTER 02, DEFINITIONS](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000063717?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) . The term "active duty" has its own definition for each benefit. VCEs should refer to the specific part of M22-4 for the definition of “active duty” regarding Chapter 30, Chapter 33, or Chapter 1606. The following paragraphs may clarify the effect of specific types of service.

**b. Full-time Duty in the Reserve or National Guard.**

In some instances full-time duty in the Reserve or National Guard may be considered active duty under Title 38. For Chapter 30, see [Part 5 Chapter 1 - General](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073756?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) . National Guard members and Reservists who have served a minimum of 90 days of qualifying service are eligible to received Chapter 33 benefits. For additional information regarding Chapter 33 benefits, refer to  [Sub-Chapter 2. Veterans](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073736?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) paragraph 2.01(c).

**(1) Duty Status of Reservists.** At the beginning of an enlistment in the Reserves, an individual is required to perform Initial Active Duty for Training (IADT) for a period of not less than 4 months. The remainder of the enlistment is spent as a member of the Ready Reserves.

**A. Active or Inactive Duty for Training.** Title [38 CFR 3.6](http://vbaw.vba.va.gov/bl/21/publicat/Regs/Part3/3_6.htm) describes active and inactive duty for training. If a Reservist's only service is active or inactive duty for training, the Reservist must have died or sustained a disability during the period of training to be considered a Veteran. If the period of training did not result in death or disability, the Reservist is not a Veteran based on that service.

**B. Full-time Duty in the Uniformed Services.** Since the 1960's the Reserve components have had several programs such as the Active Guard Reserve (AGR) and the Active Duty Support (ADS) Program in which members serve full-time in operational or support positions but are never formally called to active duty. This type of service, whether it lasts one day or 3 years, is classified by the service departments as "active duty for training (ACDUTRA)."

The term "full-time duty in the uniformed services" is not defined in 38 U.S.C or 38 CFR. However, an opinion issued by the General Counsel on November 9, 1988, makes it clear that, despite the military's ACDUTRA classification, VA has the authority to declare certain types of service performed by Reservists to be "active duty" for the purposes of VA benefits. According to this opinion, Reservists meet the definition of active duty if the facts of record establish that the service was full-time and was for operational or support (as opposed to training) purposes.

Certain types of Reservist duty are generally **NOT** "full-time duty in the armed forces." These include the following:

(a) IADT (Except for Chapter 33 depending upon total aggregate service)

(b) Active Duty Training (ADT) \*\*

\*\* In rare situations, ADT is qualifying and is considered FT duty for Chapter 33. Refer to [Part 12 Sub-Chapter 2. Veterans](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073736?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) paragraph 2.01 Qualifying Service for additional information.

There are two other categories of Reservist duty which may or may not constitute "full-time duty in the armed forces" depending upon how it is defined for the specific benefit program. These categories are Active Duty for Special Work (ADSW) and Active Duty (AD). They generally imply that the Reservist is performing support duties rather than training. ADSW is used for periods of less than 140 days service and AD for longer periods.

Reservists mobilized under Title [10 under Section 688](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:688 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title10-section688)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true), [12301(a), 12301(d), 12301(g)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:12301 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title10-section12301)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true), [12302](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:12302 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title10-section12302)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true), or [12304](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:12304 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title10-section12304)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) qualify as active duty service for the purpose of Chapter 33 regardless of the narrative reason or the type of duties being performed, although it may be deducted depending upon the total amount of aggregate service.

**NOTE:** [Section 12301(d) of Title 10](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:12301 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title10-section12301)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true#substructure-location_d) was formerly [Section 672(d) of Title 10](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:672 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title10-section672)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true#substructure-location_d). Some states still use the old categorization of [672(d)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:672 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title10-section672)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true#substructure-location_d) on active duty orders. VCEs should recognize Active Duty service under [Section 672(d) of Title 10](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:672 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title10-section672)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true#substructure-location_d) as qualifying for Chapter 33 benefits if the service was on or after September 11, 2001.

**(2) National Guard Service (38 CFR 3.6**[**(c)**](http://vbaw.vba.va.gov/bl/21/publicat/Regs/Part3/3_6.htm#c) **&** [**(d)**](http://vbaw.vba.va.gov/bl/21/publicat/Regs/Part3/3_6.htm#d) **and** [**3.7(m)**](http://vbaw.vba.va.gov/bl/21/publicat/Regs/Part3/3_7.htm#m)**)**

a. The Army National Guard and the Air National Guard operate full-time operational and support programs similar to the Ready Reserves. However, [Section 101(22) of Title 38, U.S.C](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:101 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section101)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true#substructure-location_22), provides separate definitions of "active duty for training" for Guard personnel and Reservists. While the definition for Reservists permits the interpretation that full-time duty **for purposes other than training** is active military, naval or air service, the definition for Guard personnel does **NOT** permit this interpretation. Therefore, full-time operational/support service performed by Guard personnel in ACDUTRA status does **NOT** qualify as active duty for purposes of VA benefits **UNLESS** the member or former member has a service-connected disability or injury that was incurred or aggravated during the ACDUTRA period. Full-time service in the National Guard for the purpose of organizing, administering, recruiting, instructing, or training may be qualifying. In addition, activations in support of a national emergency under [Section 502(f) of Title 32](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:32 section:502 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title32-section502)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true#substructure-location_f) may be qualifying.

**A. Service under Title 10 U.S.C.** If the Guard unit or the member individually is "activated" under the authority of Title 10 U.S.C., members who report for active duty (service characterized as Federal Active Duty) generally have qualifying service for Title 38 purposes until deactivated. If an individual's orders specify activation to temporary duty under Title 10, further development regarding the purpose of the activation is generally not needed **unless** there is evidence in file showing the purpose of the activation was to train the individual. The order to active duty **MUST** state that service is under Title 10 U.S.C.

**B. Service under Title 32 U.S.C.** Full-time National Guard service is "active duty for training" under [38 U.S.C. 101(22)(C)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:101 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section101)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true#substructure-location_22_c) if performed under [32 U.S.C. 316](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:32 section:316 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title32-section316)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true), [502](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:32 section:502 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title32-section502)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true), [503](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:32 section:503 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title32-section503)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true), [504](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:32 section:504 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title32-section504)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) or [505](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:32 section:505 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title32-section505)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true). This is true regardless of whether the member is performing operational duty or is undergoing training. Operational duty includes, for example, AGR and ADS service. National Guard service does not meet the definition of "active military, naval, or air service" in [38 U.S.C. 101(22)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:101 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section101)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true#substructure-location_22) unless the member or former member is service disabled and therefore subject to an exception outlined in [38 U.S.C. 101(24)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:101 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section101)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true#substructure-location_24) or [106(b)(3)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:106 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section106)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true#substructure-location_b_3f). Determinations as to whether such service is qualifying will depend upon the definitions used for the specific benefit program.

**NOTE 1:** The terms AGR and ADS apply to Guard personnel as well as to Reservists who have served in these capacities.

**NOTE 2:** Since 1964 there has been authority under [32 U.S.C. 502(f)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:32 section:502 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title32-section502)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true#substructure-location_f) to assign National Guard members who provide full-time support to the Reserve components to full-time operational duty even though they are not activated.

**c. VA Responsibility.** It is VA’s responsibility to determine eligibility to VA education benefits. By coordinating with the service departments, VA will make the final decision for claimant’s eligibility.

**d. Requests for Additional Service Data.** In situations when the VCE may be unable to make an eligibility decision based on the information submitted from the claimant, additional development may be required. In those situations, VCEs must request clarification of the service data of record to what the claimant has submitted and to what is available in multiple verification systems including VIS, DPRIS, BDN, etc.

**NOTE:** Development should occur in DPRIS first and the claim will be suspended in TIMS for 24 hours. **VCEs should use this link:** <https://www.dpris.dod.mil/>. The initial request to DPRIS should be captured into TIMS. If the actual request cannot be captured, a NOTE should be created with the VCEs name and date of request to DPRIS. When the documentation in DPRIS is received, if the VCE can make the determination, they should process the claim.

If the information received from DPRIS (or if DPRIS cannot provide additional information), the VCE should develop further to all sources simultaneously (both the claimant and service department point of contact) in order to expedite the claim.

**3.12  VERIFICATION OF SERVICE - SERVICEPERSONS, VETERANS, AND DEPENDENTS**

---

**a. Verification of Service.** [On May 29, 2017, VA issued the Department of Veteran Affairs’ Memorandum which deemed VADIR (VA-DoD Identity Repository) the authoritative source for all active service periods effective January 1, 2015.](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000083620/VADIR-as-Authoritative-Source-for-All-Active-Service-Periods-after-January-1-2015)  Beginning in 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) ceased generating paper DD Form(s) 214 and began issuing them electronically.  As a result of this change, VA has directed all business lines to discontinue requesting Veterans to provide a copy of their DD Form 214 for service ending on or after January 1, 2015, and instead rely upon the service information electronically reported to VA.  The VADIR information provided to the Defense Manpower Data Center (DMDC) from the service components to VA is organized for specific business needs in the **Veterans Information Solution (VIS)**.  The VIS contains service and eligibility information consolidated for all VA Education benefits necessary for claims processing.  Education Service will use VIS as the **primary authoritative source** for verifying service..

**b. V****IS (Veterans Information Solution)**

**1.** **The VIS Education page** has been developed specifically for Education Service**.**This page contains service information organized under the following section headings:

* Profile
* Transfer of Entitlement
* Active Duty Service Periods
* Reserve & National Guard Active Duty
* Purple Heart Information
* Chapter 30 Eligibility Data
* Chapter 1606 Eligibility Data
* Kicker Information
* Training Exclusion Periods
* Excluded Obligated Periods of Service
* Military Service Academy Period
* $600 Additional Contribution
* REAP Eligibility Data
* NCS Eligibility Data

**2. The VIS Military History page** contains additional service information and certain Beneficiary Identification and Records Locator Subsystem (BIRLS) information that may be necessary for claims processing. 

Information on the Military History page is organized under the following section headings:

* Profile
* Service Periods:
  + Active Duty Service Periods
  + Guard/ Reserve Active Service (GRAS)
  + National Guard and Reserve Service Periods
  + Drill Pay Days (used by C&P only)
  + Deployment Periods
* Special Pay Periods:
  + Combat Pay & Combat Tax Exclusion
  + Hazardous Duty Pay
* Military History *from* BIRLS

**c. Verification of Service and Documentation to Establish Eligibility.** To verify service, the VCE must review information reported to VA for the appropriate benefit, match any service information provided by a claimant to DoD/DHS information reported to VA, and resolve discrepancies with the original source document(s) obtained through the Defense Personnel Records Information Retrieval System (DPRIS), the claimant, and when necessary through written verification from the service department.

Preservation of available data at the time a claim was processed, justifies claims processing actions, determinations, and also supports quality reviews.  All documentation regarding eligibility and development must be captured into the claimant’s TIMS folder.

**1.** **Original Determinations.** The VIS Military History and Education screens will be captured into the claimant’s TIMS folder for all service members, Veterans, and dependents regardless of the benefit requested.  Occasionally, a claimant may apply using the wrong application and could be denied benefits without a review for other potential eligibility.  Whenever a claimant is denied but has potential eligibility under another program, it is our duty to advise the claimant of potential eligibility and provide the appropriate application concurrent with denying eligibility to the benefit requested.  Additionally, service information in VIS may affect a dependent’s eligibility under chapter 35; DEA (see [M22-4, Part 7, Chapter 3](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073695/Part%207:%20Chapter%203%20-%20Eligibility%20Issues#305)) or chapter 33; Fry ([see M22-4, Part 12](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/topic/554400000007294/Part-12-Chapter-33)) if a dependent has served or is currently on active duty.  

**NOTE:** Evidence of other education benefits used must also be considered and captured into the file when found. (**Example:** A BIRLS Inquiry screen, “BINQ” using the claimant’s Social Security Number (SSN), not entered in the file number field, but under the social security number field will discover chapter 35 benefits used by a claimant.)

**2. Supplemental Actions.** In addition to reviewing and considering any new information received in the claimant’s TIMS folder since the claim was last manually processed, the VIS Military History and Education screens must be captured on each supplemental claim under all education benefits, except DEA/Fry cases unless also a service member.  The VCE and any reviewer or authorizer will ensure the service, eligibility, and entitlement information of record used for processing is accurate. VIS will be captured when there are no changes and when there are changes.  The VCE must update VA systems (including the Education Master Record for the current benefit being processed) as necessary as to ensure eligibility is accurate prior to processing any payments or notifying the claimant regarding eligibility.    

**NOTE:** VCEs processing supplemental claims are responsible for ensuring all service information (not only new information) used to determine benefit payments are accurate based upon current information reported in VIS or elsewhere documented in the claimant’s folder.

**d. Source Documents and Data Sources.** In addition to VADIR information available in the VIS and other VA systems, additional sources should be considered to help determine cumulative evidence. Data sources that are not in conflict and match information submitted to VA by a claimant on an application should be considered reliable.

Generally, there is no source document more creditable than a data source or vice versa.  Whenever source documents are questionable and conflict with reported information (e.g. DD Form 214, signed or dated prior to RAD), insufficiently documented (e.g. a DD Form 214 for a member of the Reserves or National Guard without an authority (i.e. title and section)) or an interpretable purpose (i.e. IADT, Operation Guardian Shield) and do not match the service information reported to VA in VIS, development is required.   

**NOTE:** In some situations, Veterans’ Benefits Management System (VBMS) may provide additional service information for claimants who may also have been approved for compensation or pension claims. VCEs can consider researching VBMS as appropriate.  VCEs must remember to capture into TIMS any service data found in VBMS which is used for determining eligibility.

**e.  Known VIS Exceptions Requiring Development.** Selected Reserve (SR) full-time service periods reported in the VIS should be considered valid and authoritative. 

Validation through DoD development is required of the following:

* Service period segments on the Education page with eligibility codes 
  + '98' (Cannot determine qualifying period. Data quality issue in transaction.) or
  + '99' (Unknown/Not Applicable)
* Verification of service may be necessary when there is conflicting evidence on file which could impact eligibility or payments.

**f.  VIS** **Authoritative Limitations.** The service data in VIS is continuously being improved.  Any newly updated information in VIS for an earlier service period should be considered valid and authoritative unless there is other evidence on file which indicates reporting may be inaccurate or incomplete.  In such instances, development would be required.

**1. Information not reported:** If the VIS does not have exclusion periods reported, the absence of such information is not a confirmation.  When a kicker, College Loan Repayment Program (LRP), or any other exclusion is indicated on an application but not in VIS, further development using DPRIS, to the claimant, and when appropriate to the service, is necessary unless the indication on the application can be rationalized as not valid or irrelevant.  Not valid applies when other reference materials provide conditions for when the disclosure could not be possible.  Some examples include a non-prior service officer or member of the Air Force reporting an active duty kicker, and exclusions for a service academy or ROTC for an enlisted service member. 

The following are examples when LRP is claimed and not valid, development will **NOT** be necessary:

* If the beneficiary entered active duty from high school, he or she has not been to college, the beneficiary could not be eligible for LRP.
* If the beneficiary is coded as 04 Ineligible/$00 paid in VIS.
* If the beneficiary is eligible under a category other than IA, IB, IC, IIA and IIB. The LRP bar does not apply to such beneficiaries.
* If the beneficiary has a kicker, he or she can't have the LRP.
* A beneficiary received an ROTC scholarship or attended a service academy.
* The Air Force did not offer LRP until May 5, 2000. Anyone who entered the Air Force prior to that date cannot be eligible for the LRP.
* The Marine Corps and the Coast Guard do not offer the LRP program.
* If the beneficiary was/is in the Army and entered active duty outside of the period between December 5, 2000 and March 3, 2003, not eligible for LRP. {Note: The Army has requested that any service members who entered on active duty between December 5, 2000 and March 3, 2003 will need to have an inquiry made if they indicate receipt of LRP.}

Irrelevant examples include when claimant is requesting buy-up when requesting chapter 33, a chapter 1606 kicker when no longer in the selected reserve, or an exclusion period for a claimant with more than 3 years of creditable service in addition to the exclusion period in question. 

Development to confirm service periods or exclusion periods (including entry or skill level training) which have no effect on eligibility should be avoided.  Instead, the VCE should add a note to clearly document the justification in the file as to the specific reason(s) why development is unnecessary and process with the verified information on hand necessary to make a determination.  For chapter 33 claims, also indicate in the comments section of the Long Term Solution (LTS) the same detailed justification to inform a reviewer both for authorization and quality checks.

**2. Previous DoD responses.**   Updated information in VIS should be considered reliable.  In other words, if a previously captured VIS record did not contain newly reported information, or the Military History page contains a reported segment as erroneous and on the Education page the period has updated or been removed – use the new information in VIS without additional clarification.  However, a DoD response should not be dismissed without unmistakable evidence of new reporting as previously described or good cause.  Good cause examples include earlier DoD responses to development with “unable to verify” or USAR title 10 service periods not previously reported.  For the latter, new reporting of creditable service should be accepted without question since we have been informed USAR revised their policy for reporting.  

**3. VIS delay in updating information**. The VIS as a data source is dependent on DoD employees updating the information.  There may times when an electronic DD Form 214 may be received as part of an application packet, but VIS has not been updated. 

**Example:** A claimant submitted a DD Form 214 for the period January 15, 2019, through May 15, 2019.  The VCE is reviewing the claim well over 30 days after the DD214 release date, yet the VIS is still reporting the claimant on duty. 

This is an example which indicates the VIS is incomplete, therefore, development is required per [M22-4, Part 3, 3.13](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073583/Part%203:%20Chapter%203%20-%20Processing%20Applications%20for%20Benefits#313).

**g. Authorization for Eligibility Decisions**. Decisions involving changes in eligibility require at least 2 signatures ([M22-4, Part 3, Chapter 1.19](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073486/Part%203:%20Chapter%201%20-%20Administrative%20Issues#119)) and must be properly documented. (See [Big Pay guidance in M22-4, Part 3, Chapter 1.20](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073486/Part%203:%20Chapter%201%20-%20Administrative%20Issues#119) for documentation requirements and when additional signatures must be in the file prior to releasing payments.) 

**3.13  DEVELOPMENT FOR ADDITIONAL REQUIRED INFORMATION**

---

**a.** If an eligibility determination cannot be made after reviewing the Veterans Infomrataion Solution (VIS) which is the authoritative and primary source and when necessary soliciting information from DPRIS, VCEs should simultaneously develop to the claimant and DoD.

1. When developing to the claimant, VCEs should advise the claimant on the information under development with DoD and request supporting evidence of service from the claimant when approriate and necessary to make a decision.

2. When developing to DoD, VCEs should only develop for the following service related issues (when not available already):

* Service period dates
* Character of Service
* Separation Reason
* Title
* Section

**NOTE:** In all cases, when developing to DoD, VCE’s must supply the period of service and the condition on which additional information or clarification is required. Ambiguous development to DoD such as “Verify all Chapter 33 qualifying service” is never permitted. In the request, the VCE should be as specific as possible. Remember, VA (i.e. the VCE) makes the eligibility decision for education benefits. The service departments will provide information as it is asked and they have no authority to determine if service is qualifying for Title 38 benefits.

**b. ADDITIONAL TERMS AND CONCEPTS.** In order for VCEs to properly interpret service information received from the different departments, the additional terms and concepts must be discussed.

1. The term “Entry Level and Skills Training” means the following:

* Army: Basic Combat Training and Advanced Individual Training (AIT) or One Station Unit Training (OSUT). Enlisted soldiers attend Basic Training (BCT). BCT is either combined with AIT (also known as OSUT) or AIT occurs at another location to earn a military occupational skill (MOS). Additional skill identifier or other training should not be identified as training. (i.e., Airborne School, Defense Language Institute, Ranger or Special Forces Training…).
* Navy: Recruit Training (or Boot Camp) and Skill Training (or so-called "A" School). Enlisted Sailors attend Recruit Training or Boot Camp (RTC). Many attend advanced skill training (apprenticeship) or “A” school to earn a “rating”. Others go directly into the fleet without additional training serving as an airman, fireman, or seaman.
* Air Force: Basic Military Training and Technical Training. Enlisted Airmen attend Basic Military Training (BMT). These Airmen attend technical training to earn their Air Force Specialty Code (AFSC) which is similar to a Navy “Rating” or the Army and Marines MOS job identification.
* Marine Corps: Recruit Training and Marine Corps Training (or School of Infantry Training). Enlistees enter Boot Camp. In Boot Camp, the individual will either attend the School of Infantry (SOI) or Marine Combat Training (MCT). Subsequent on-the-job skill training or MOS training should **not** be identified as training. This time is fully creditable under Chapter 33.
* Coast Guard: Basic Training and Skill Training (or so-called "A" School). Enlisted Guardians attend Basic Training which is similar to the Navy, where they attend “A” School to earn a rating. [PL 111-377](https://www.congress.gov/111/plaws/publ377/PLAW-111publ377.pdf) added “A” School to the definition of entry level and skill training for Coast Guard.

**NOTE:** Coast Guard Basic Training and Skill Training applies only to service which began on or after January 4, 2011. This Post-9/11 service when entered prior to January 4, 2011, is fully creditable and should not be identified as training under chapter 33.

2. Acronyms for some *initial training* performed by Officers:

* BOLC – Basic Officer Leaders Course (Army)
* DCOs – Direct Commission Officers
* OBC – Officer Basic Course
* OCS – Officer Candidate School
* ROTC – Reserve Officer Training Corps
* SMCs – Senior Military Colleges
* TBS – The Basic School (USMC)
* USAFA – United States Air Force Academy
* USCGA – United States Coast Guard Academy
* USNA – United States Naval Academy
* USMA – United States Military Academy
* WOBC – Warrant Officer Basic Course

Generally a VCE should not develop for any initial training for officers. Officers complete their training (or are considered trained) before commissioning. VA does not reduce an officer’s qualifying active duty for entry level or skill training performed while on qualifying active duty.

| Scenario | ID | Reason |
| --- | --- | --- |
List of Probable Scenarios, ID and Reason

| 30 continuous days of creditable service, seperated for a service connected disabilty | O | Enter initial entry and initial skills training into the Long Term Solution (LTS) if known, and remove if system does not calculate correct benefit level. Known issue: in certain instances LTS will not indicate 100% benefit level. |
| No honorable or creditable service | O | Enter initial entry and initial skills training into lts if known, do not develop. Eligibility will not change. |
| 30 months or more of creditable service | O | Enter initial entry and initial skills training into LTS if known, do not develop. Presumed to have been completed prior to 9/11/01. |
| Less than 30 months of creditable service with more than one year of service prior to 9/11/01. | O | Enter initial entry and initial skills training into LTS if known, do not develop. Presumed to have been completed prior to 9/11/01. |
| Any length of service and excluding first 3 years for Loan Repayment Plan (LRP) | O | Enter initial entry and initial skills training into LTS if known, do not develop. Benefit level will not change. |
| Less than 30 months of creditable service as an officer | N | Do not identify officer training, this is fully creditable |
| Less than 30 months of creditable service as an enlisted memeber | Y | Identify initial entry and skill level training and enter this data into LTS. Develop when not in block 12h of a DD214, not listed in the Veterans Information Solution (VIS) system or whenever uncertain. |

3. Block 12h of a DD214:

The VCE should enter dates identified as Entry Level and Skills Training into LTS as Training. If not indicated in VIS or on the DD Form 214, the VCE must develop to the service department. However, the VCE must be very specific and request verification for the period of initial entry or skill level training when the claimant is at or below the 80% benefit level with all Chapter 33 service included.

**NOTE:** Remember there is no need to develop when there is one year of active duty before September 11, 2001 or the claimant is an officer in any branch of service.

4. EST development. A VCE should develop to the claimant’s service branch when Entry Level and Skills Training information either

* Cannot be found
* Is found but there are discrepancies in the data, or
* If data has changed or disappeared

When developing for Entry Level and Skills Training information, the request should list exactly the information needed.

**EXAMPLE:** When requesting Entry Level and Skills Training information for a claimant who was in the Army, the VCE would request the following:

* Service periods that the claimant was in Basic Combat Training
* Advanced Individual Training and,
* One Station Unit Training

5. Other Examples. As previously stated, all Reserve and National Guard required IADT is ordered under [Title 10 USC 12301(d)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:12301 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title10-section12301)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true#substructure-location_d), meets the definition of active duty under Chapter 33.

Some portions of IADT may not need to be labelled “entry level and skill training” as only those specific courses codified in [38 USC 3301](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3301 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3301)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true)(2) are to be identified as training under Chapter 33.

Title 10 ADT, ADOS, and ADSW are performed under [12301(d)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:12301 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title10-section12301)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true#substructure-location_d) meets the definition of active duty under Chapter 33.

Title 32 (National Guard Only) ADT, ADOS and ADSW are **not** creditable service unless in support of a National Emergency and supported by federal funds under [Section 502(f).](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:32 section:502 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title32-section502)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true#substructure-location_f) This is a rare occurrence. VCEs should not enter service that does not meet the definition of “active duty” into the LTS.

**C. CONTROL FOR DOD VERIFICATION.** While VCEs will use the approved DoD development spreadsheet to ensure the appropriate question is submitted to the appropriate Point of Contact (POC), it is the VCE’s responsibility to ensure they maintain control of the claim.

When a VCE has determined the DoD POC must be contacted, development is required to the claimant directly as well. The VCE should send the appropriate development letter explaining ***specifically*** what is needed and advise the claimant a request has been submitted to the service department as well. This letter should be explicit explaining a final decision cannot be made until this information is received. The claimant may have the documentation necessary to adjudicate the claim. The letter should explain how the claimant can submit the documentation. A copy of all development (letters, requests, etc.) should be placed in the claimant’s TIMS folder and control in BDN and TIMS set for 45 days from the date of the letter. No end product is authorized for development.

As discussed in Subchapter 6, Duty to Assist (DOA) of this Chapter, service information found on DD Form 214s and other service documentation is considered to be under federal custody. Therefore, development must continue until the claimant supplies the information, the service department responds with the information requested OR the service department responds with a statement indicating the information is non-existent or cannot be obtained.

Repetitive development to the service departments will not expedite the claims. Once the VCE has requested the information to the service department, additional requests should not be routinely submitted.

At the time of development, as stated, the VCE should review all creditable service on file and issue a COE or award benefits based on any period of service for which development is not needed, if at all possible. If the award is unable to pay at the highest level claimed, the award letter must explain, specifically to the claimant what is required to perfect the claim. The VCE and Senior VCE are entitled to a 400 end product for the interim decision. ***However, the controlling end product (whether it is an original or supplemental) cannot be cleared until a final decision has been made.*** At the time of the interim decision, the VCE should extend the end product in BDN for 90 days from the original date of development. The claim should remain open in TIMS and placed in AWAIT Mail until 90 days from date of the original development to the service department.

The RPO must control the claim while a request is pending from the service department. Once the end product has matured to 90 days, if no final decision may be made, the claim information should be forwarded to the Operations team ([VAVBAWAS/CO/222](mailto:222A.VBAVACO@va.gov ?subject=Part%203%3A%20Chapter%203%20-%20Processing%20Applications%20for%20Benefits)) for situational awareness that the service department has not responded. This email should include the claimant’s name, the service branch information from which the information was requested (if National Guard, include the state), the last four digits of the Social Security number or identification number, and a summary of the missing information. VCEs must continue to diary the claim in BDN and TIMS until the Operations team provides additional guidance.

**CAUTION:** Remember, if the VCE can pay **ANY** part of the claimant’s award, this must be done. Do not withhold any payments to any claimant while waiting on the service department to verify additional service.

**NOTE:** Additional guidance is forthcoming regarding proper DOD kicker development. VCEs should always pay basic eligibility to claimants and develop separately for kicker information. Until that is updated, control the development for kicker contracts when necessary, using a supplemental end product with the development to both the service department and the claimant.

If the VCE validates through the cumulative sources that the period of service is not qualifying, the VCE should prepare a disallowance through BDN or LTS and notify the Veteran. A notice of appeal and procedural rights will be enclosed.

If a Veteran previously filed an application as a serviceperson, a separate formal application is not required upon discharge. However, the VCE will request whatever information may be necessary to determine the person's eligibility as a Veteran such as a member-4 copy of DD Form 214.

**SUBCHAPTER III.  MISCELLANEOUS SERVICE ISSUES**

 

**3.14  STATUTORY BARS AND FORFEITURE OF BENEFITS**

---

a. There are certain statutory bars which apply to all VA benefits regardless of the character of discharge.  Sections [5303](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:5303%20edition:prelim)%20OR%20(granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section5303)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true), [6104](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:6104%20edition:prelim)%20OR%20(granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section6104)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true), and [6105](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:6105%20edition:prelim)%20OR%20(granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section6105)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) of title [38 United States Code](http://uscode.house.gov/browse/prelim@title38&edition=prelim) govern bars and forfeiture of benefits.

Sections [6104](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:6104%20edition:prelim)%20OR%20(granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section6104)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) and [6105](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:6105%20edition:prelim)%20OR%20(granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section6105)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true): forfeiture for treason and for subversive activities, respectively, serves as a total bar to benefits.  It is a forfeiture of all VA benefit eligibility regardless of reenlistment or length of service (i.e., periods of service are irrelevant).  However, a statutory bar under [section](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:5303%20edition:prelim)%20OR%20(granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section5303)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) [5303](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:5303%20edition:prelim)%20OR%20(granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section5303)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) will apply only to the period of service from which discharged or dismissed for the separation reasons listed below:

* discharge of a conscientious objector who refused to perform military duties,
* discharge by reason of the sentence of a General Court Martial,
* resignation of an officer for the good of the service and desertion
* other than honorable discharge for AWOL exceeding 180 days unless there were compelling circumstances.

NOTE: Eligibility may be established if a Veteran with a statutory bar described in [38 USC 5303](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:5303%20edition:prelim)%20OR%20(granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section5303)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) has another qualifying period of service, including a conditional discharge for the purpose of reenlisting.

1. When denying benefits based upon [38 USC 5303](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:5303%20edition:prelim)%20OR%20(granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section5303)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true), the reason for denial is not “insufficient service” or “character of discharge”; rather, it is “statutory bar to benefits by reason of discharge for (*insert reason*).”

2. When denying benefits based upon [38 USC 6104](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:6104%20edition:prelim)%20OR%20(granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section6104)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) or [38 USC 6105](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:6105%20edition:prelim)%20OR%20(granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section6105)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true), the reason for denial is ‘forfeiture of benefits by reason of discharge for (*insert either “*treason” *or “*subversive activities” *- as applicable*).’

References:

[38 USC 5303](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:5303%20edition:prelim)%20OR%20(granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section5303)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) Certain bars to benefits

[38 USC 6104](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:6104%20edition:prelim)%20OR%20(granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section6104)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) Forfeiture for treason

[38 USC 6105](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:6105%20edition:prelim)%20OR%20(granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section6105)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) Forfeiture for subversive activities

**3.15  CHARACTER OF DISCHARGE**

---

**a. Chapter 32, Chapter 35, and Section 903.** For these benefits (if the claimant was on active duty) the claimant's discharge must be "under conditions other than dishonorable."

**b. Chapter 30 and Chapter 33.** For these benefits, only discharges that are specifically "honorable" are acceptable. However, conditional discharges are possible. Please refer to Part V or XII for specific rules. In addition, there are exceptions under Chapter 33 in which the character of discharge does not have to be honorable if discharged for a disability. Please refer to part XII for additional information.

**3.16  Service Academy Preparatory Schools and Service Academies**

---

**a. Preparatory Schools.** The Army, Navy, Coast Guard, and Air Force provide preparatory school training for qualified personnel who are candidates for appointment to one of the service academies. This training is provided at the U.S. Military Academy Preparatory School, the U.S. Naval Academy Preparatory School, U.S. Coast Guard Academy Preparatory School, and the U.S. Air Force Academy Preparatory School.

**b. Admission to Preparatory Schools.** Generally there are two distinct paths for admission to preparatory schools:

1. The cadet candidate (CC) arrives as an enlisted person serving on active duty in the Regular component. A CC who enters the preparatory school as an enlisted person serving on active duty in the Regular component is still considered a member of the Regular component and continuing with his or her active duty even while at the prep school. He or she is merely reassigned to the Prep School from his or her current unit as a permanent change of station.

2. The CC is admitted to the preparatory school from the Selected Reserves or directly from the public arena (e.g., recent high school graduate). Someone admitted from the public arena enlists as an “Invitational Reservist” solely for the purposes of attending the prep school. Both of these types of Reservists serve on active duty while at the prep school under [10 U.S.C. 12301(d)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:12301 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title10-section12301)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) orders. This service is considered “active duty for training.”

**c. Chapter 33:** Time spent in Service Academy Preparatory Schools qualifies for Chapter 33. This service is Active Duty under [38 USC 3301 (1) (A)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3301 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3301)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) or [38 USC 3311 (1)(B)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3311 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3311)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true).

Training at a prep school is not excludable as time serving as a cadet or midshipman at a service academy. (See paragraph (e) below).

Training at a prep school is not excludable as “entry level and skill training” because it does not meet the definition of that term as defined in [38 USC 3301(2)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3301 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3301)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true).

**d. Non-Chapter 33:** Time spent in Service Academy Preparatory Schools by itself is unlikely to be sufficient to establish eligibility unless pursuant to an enlistment and separated under a qualifying exception for not completing the initial term of service.

A CC who enters the preparatory school from active duty, is considered a member of the regular component and therefore is continuing with his active duty. In this situation, he or she is merely reassigned to the Prep School from his or her current unit.

A CC who enters the preparatory school from the Selected Reserves or directly from the public arena is considered to be serving on active duty for training. Eligibility criteria for Chapter 30 or 32/903 must exist from some other service to establish eligibility to these Title 38 benefits. Eligibility under Title 10, Chapters 1606 and 1607 may exist and is determined by the member’s service department.

In all instances, eligibility rules specific to each benefit should be applied when determining potential eligibility.

**e. General Counsel (GC) Opinion.** In 1994, GC affirmed the previous decision that characterizations of an individual’s service at the U.S. Air Force Academy Preparatory School for purposes of entitlement to Veterans’ benefits depends upon the status in which the individual enters this school. Service by an individual attending this school as a reservist called to active duty for the sole purpose of attending this school constitutes “active duty for training” and not active duty. Service by an enlisted person on active duty who is reassigned to this school without a release from active duty constitutes a continuation of that enlisted person’s active duty.

GC has ruled that assignment to a preparatory school is not equivalent to assignment to a service academy because a preparatory school has no connection with an academy.

**f. Service Academy.**

**1.** Active Duty service while a cadet or midshipman: Chapter 30, 32, 33, and Section 903 regulations require service as a cadet or midshipman at a service academy must be excluded from computation of periods of active duty.

**2.** Active Duty service upon graduation from an academy:

**Chapter 33:** Academy graduates may qualify for Ch. 33. However, the five years served immediately after graduation will be not creditable and should be excluded from any aggregate time in service calculation. Title[10 USC 4348(a)(2)(B)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:4348 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title10-section4348)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) for USMA, title [10 USC 6959(a)(2)(B)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:6959 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title10-section6959)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) for United States Naval Academy, Title [14 USC 182(b)(2)(B)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:14 section:182 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title14-section182)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) and title [10 USC 9348(a)(2)(B)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:9348 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title10-section9348)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) for United States Air Force Academy, says that graduates “will serve on active duty for at least five years immediately after such appointment” and [38 U.S.C. 3311(d)(2)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3311 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3311)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true#substructure-location_d_2) says that this time will not be used in calculating aggregate time for ch. 33 entitlement.

**EXAMPLE:** A West Point student graduates and is commissioned on May 27, 2003, and served through May 26, 2008. The individual's academy commitment ended on May 26, 2008. The five year excluded period runs from May 27, 2003 through May 26, 2008. The first date eligibility for a period of qualifying service may be counted is May 27, 2008.

Special Rule for Cadets of the Coast Guard Academy: The requirement under Chapter 33 to exclude the first five years of active duty service following commission should not apply to Coast Guard Academy graduates of the Class of 2014 or earlier. In general, the requirement to serve on active duty for five years immediately after appointment prevents Service Academy Graduates from accruing creditable service towards the Post-9/11 GI Bill until the obligation period has been served. This provision will now also apply to former cadets of the Coast Guard Academy graduating in the Class of 2015 or later beginning upon their date of commission (the only way for exemption from the five year exclusion is if the person was originally a member of the Class of 2014 or earlier but, for some reason, ultimately graduated with a later class). This is due to the fact that the Coast Guard Academy Cadet pursuant to a commitment signed after January 4, 2011, is obligating service after the legislation became law and effective.

See  [Part 12, Chapter 00: Index](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000078305?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) for information regarding Chapter 33, Information about Benefits, Excluded Service.

See [Part 5 Chapter 1 - General](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073756?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) for the effect of graduating from a service academy on Chapter 30 eligibility.

**3.17  DEDUCTIBLE TIME**

---

Two types of military service (not-on-duty time and non-creditable time) are not included as active duty for education benefit purposes. This information can be found on DD Form 214.

**a. Not-on-Duty Time.** Not-on-duty time does not count as active duty under Chapters 30, 32, 33, and Sections 901 and 903. Periods of service which constitute not-on-duty time are defined by [38 CFR 3.15](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.1.3_115) and include:

(1) Time lost on absence without leave (without pay).

(2) Time lost while under arrest (without acquittal).

(3) In desertion.

(4) Time lost while undergoing a sentence of court-martial.

**b. Non-creditable Service.** Non-creditable service does not count as active duty under Chapters 30, 32, 33, and sections 901 and 903. Periods of non-creditable service are:

(1) Periods while assigned by the service department to a civilian school for a course substantially the same as established courses offered to civilians. The term "civilian school" means any public or private school providing adult education, including colleges or universities, and schools providing business, trade, vocational, or technical training. It is not material that there were curricular deviations incident to the particular student's military assignments, or that a regular academic degree or certificate was not issued, as long as the course was one within the regularly prescribed program or curriculum of the school. A DD Form 214 will normally provide the necessary information.

**NOTE:** See  [Part 5 Chapter 1 - General](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073756?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) , for the effect that training at a "civilian school" has on Chapter 30 eligibility.

(2) Service under the provisions of [Section 12103](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:12103 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title10-section12103)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) (formerly [Section 511(d) of Title 10](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:511 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title10-section511)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true#substructure-location_d)) pursuant to an enlistment in the Army National Guard or the Air National Guard, or as a Reserve for service in the Army Reserve, Naval Reserve, Air Force Reserve, Marine Corps Reserve, or Coast Guard Reserve.

(3) Periods of military service in an excess leave status.

**NOTE 1:** A Serviceperson attending school in an excess leave status, if otherwise eligible, may be paid at the rates payable to Veterans including additional allowance for dependents. Excess leave is defined as leave without pay and is granted only by the service department under emergency or unusual circumstances. The service department places the individual in a "leave without pay" status; the Serviceperson pays the tuition and fees and agrees to extend the length of service on active duty. Education benefits may be authorized for the full period of enrollment certified by the school even though there may be a brief period of active duty during a holiday or during any other day the school was not in session which did not interrupt the continuity of pursuit of the course.

**NOTE 2:** There is an important distinction in service department programs in which the Serviceperson attends a civilian school while on excess leave without pay and other programs in which the Serviceperson attends a civilian school while on a temporary "duty assignment with full pay and allowances." In the latter instance, the student is considered to be on active duty and should be paid education benefits at the rates payable to Servicepersons unless the military is paying for the training.

(4) Periods of Service Not considered Active Duty for Chapter 33

* Was assigned to a civilian institution for a course of education which was substantially the same as established courses offered to civilians,
* Served as a cadet or midshipman at one of the service academies, or
* Served under the provisions of [Section 12103(d)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:12103 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title10-section12103)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) (initial skills and training) of Title 10 pursuant to an enlistment in the Army National Guard, Air National Guard or Reserve components.
* Was called up to active duty from a reserve component of the Armed Forces, Army National Guard or Air National Guard, under Title 10 and it was under a section other than [688](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:688 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title10-section688)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true), [12301(a)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:12301 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title10-section12301)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true#substructure-location_a), [12301(d)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:12301 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title10-section12301)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true#substructure-location_d), [12301(g)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:12301 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title10-section12301)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true#substructure-location_g), [12302](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:12302 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title10-section12302)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true), or [12304](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:12304 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title10-section12304)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) or [Section 712 of Title 14](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:14 section:712 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title14-section712)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) for the USCG Reserve.
* Was called up to active duty under Title 32 that was NOT under [Title 32 502(f)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:32 section:502  edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title32-section502 )&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true#substructure-location_f) for the purpose of responding to a national emergency declared by the President and supported by Federal Funds.
* Served full time in the National Guard under Title 32 for a purpose other than organizing, administering, recruiting, instructing, or training.

**SUBCHAPTER IV.  TRAINING UNDER PRIOR BENEFIT PROGRAMS**

 

**3.18  GENERAL**

---

**a. Basic Prior Training Determination.** The VCE must first determine the amount of prior training under other programs in all cases where prior training is indicated. No person may receive benefits exceeding a total of 48 months under Chapters 30, 32, 33, 1606 or 1607 or 81 months for individuals who use Chapter 35 with entitlement to other VA education programs by combining benefits under two or more benefit programs.

**NOTE 1:** Development is necessary before initially paying current benefits when the amount of prior training and the current award could exceed 48 months or 81 months.

**NOTE 2: Important Points for understanding the 81-month rule**

1. The extension does not apply to individuals who have **exhausted** 48 months of benefits **prior** to October 1, 2013 (i.e. it does not apply if the BDN No Pay Date is prior to October 2, 2013, or the LTS Entitlement Exhaust Date is **prior** to October 1, 2013).

2. Individuals who use non-35 benefits **cannot exceed** 48 months of entitlement between those non-35 sources.

**b. Prior Training Steps.** These general steps are to assist VCEs in identifying prior training information and determining the amount of any prior training a claimant may have taken.

(1) The VCE must review the claimant's application. Does he/she claim additional training under another VA education program? Look to see if he/she claims prior training under Chapter 35 under a different file number.

(2) Using BDN, the VCE should search for additional master records. Use the MINQ command to access Chapter 1606, 1607, 30, 31, 32, 33, and 34 master records. Remember, there could be additional prior training taken under Chapter 35 under a different claim number.

(3) Determine all prior VA training. VCEs must account for all prior VA training.

(4) Prior VA training must be entered into BDN/LTS to ensure entitlement does not exceed 48 or 81 months as appropriate. Specific instructions are in each part of M22-4 regarding the benefit type.

**3.19 COMPUTATIONS FOR TRAINING UNDER PRIOR VA BENEFIT PROGRAMS**

---

**a. Prior VA Training Computations.** All education, Chapters 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 1606, 1607, and Sections 901 and 903 should be reviewed. In most cases, determine the prior training by BDN screens or LTS.

**b. Procedures.** After obtaining all available records of the applicant's prior training under prior VA laws, determine the total amount of entitlement used. Enter this total amount of entitlement into BDN or LTS as prior training except when processing Chapter 32 benefits. BDN determines the current entitlement. For benefit specific procedures, see the following:

(1) Chapter 30. Review M21/M23 for any prior entitlement used.

(2) Chapter 31. Review M33/M34 for any prior entitlement used.

(3) Chapter 32. Review M26/M27 for any prior entitlement used.

(4) Chapter 33. Verify in both BDN **and** LTS for any prior entitlement used.

(5) Chapter 34. Review M25 for any prior entitlement used.

(6) Chapter 35. Review M21/M23 for prior entitlement used.

(7) Chapter 1606. Review M21/M23 for prior entitlement used.

(8) Chapter 1607. Review M21/M23 for prior entitlement used.

**SUBCHAPTER V. RULES OF EVIDENCE**

**3.20  EVIDENCE REQUESTED FROM CLAIMANT**

---

**a. Complete Request.** Use BDN or LTS for development if it will produce a letter which clearly tells the claimant what evidence is needed; otherwise, send the appropriate PCGL development letter.

**b. Enclosures.** Enclose all necessary forms or website links when writing to a claimant.

**c. Email messages and Telephone usage.** Use of email messages and telephone development is strongly encouraged when a written response is not required. VCE must be certain to follow appropriate security and privacy issues when corresponding through email to non-VA personnel including applicants.

(1) Document all information received by telephone on VA Form 119, Report of Contact.

(2) Award and denial letters must include reference to any telephone evidence used in the decision. VCEs should include the date of the call and the person supplying the information.

**d. Notice of Time Limit.** The VCE should advise the claimant if they fail to furnish the evidence within the specified time limit it may result in the disallowance of the claim. Specify the time limit.

**e. Controls for Submission of Evidence**

(1) Unless otherwise specifically provided, establish a 30-day control for submission of evidence.

(2) If the evidence needed is not received within 30 days, disallow the claim for failure to prosecute. Notify the claimant of the reason for the disallowance and of the one-year time limit for submission of the evidence. Furnish notice of procedural and appellate rights.

(3) If the claimant furnishes some but not all requested evidence and the evidence submitted does not permit award action, do not disallow the claim for failure to prosecute until 30 days have elapsed from the date the evidence was requested. After 30 days, disallow the claim, advise the claimant specifically what essential evidence was not received and of the one-year time limit for submission of the evidence. Furnish notice of procedural and appellate rights.

(4) If the claimant furnishes part of the evidence before 30 days have elapsed and some benefits can be awarded, do not defer payment pending receipt of the rest of the evidence. Take award action. Inform the claimant of the evidence considered the reasons for the decision and that action on the remaining aspects of the claim has been deferred pending receipt of the other requested evidence. Enclose notice of procedural and appellate rights. **Maintain pending-issue control until final action is taken**. If denial of the additional benefits results from the failure to furnish requested evidence, inform the claimant of the denial, outlining the evidence that was requested but not furnished and of the one-year time limit for submission of the evidence. Furnish notice of procedural and appellate rights.

(5) It is improper to deny a claim simultaneously with development of the same issue. A control with an accurate date of claim must be maintained as long as development is pending. If initial development raises new issues which must be resolved or if initial development failed to request essential evidence, extend the control for 30 days from the date of the most recent request for evidence.

(6) Grant an extension of a control for evidence if requested by the claimant or the claimant's authorized representative as long as a good faith effort is being made to furnish the requested evidence. An extension does not affect the statutory time limit for submission of evidence or the effective date of an award.

**f. Address Unknown**

(1) If any correspondence to a claimant, including award letters or requests for evidence, is returned as undeliverable, review the file to ensure the current address was used.

(2) If a request for evidence essential to establish entitlement addressed to the claimant's last known address is returned unclaimed, do not extend the time limit for submitting the evidence. In this situation consider the claim abandoned after the expiration of one-year from the date of request. See [38 CFR 3.158(a)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.1.3_1158).

**SUBCHAPTER VI.  DUTY TO ASSIST**

**NOTE:** This subchapter covers the specifics of “Duty to Assist” (DTA) but is not all inclusive. VCEs may go above and beyond DTA in some cases, but must always fulfill the minimum level of DTA.

**3.21 BACKGROUND**

---

**a. Origin.** The Veterans Claims Assistance Act (VCAA) of 2000 requires VA to make reasonable efforts to assist a claimant in obtaining the evidence necessary to substantiate the claim. This includes any relevant records that the claimant identifies and authorizes VA to obtain. If attempting to obtain records from a Federal department or agency, we must continue our attempts unless it is reasonably certain such records do not exist or that further efforts to obtain the records would be futile.

**b. Decisions.** Decisions on VA benefit eligibility and entitlement are based on the evidence of record. Evidence consists of documents and information in any form provided by, or obtained for, a claimant. VA must fulfill its duty to assist by obtaining all necessary evidence before making a decision on a claim. VA is obligated to assist a claimant in developing all pertinent facts concerning a claim and render a decision granting every benefit that is supported by law. VA is also obligated to protect the interests of the Government.

**c. Identify.** Before requesting evidence, identify all issues, determine what additional evidence is needed, and ascertain the best sources for the evidence and initiate development. Request evidence from all sources simultaneously including the claimant, but *ensure* the evidence is needed before requesting it.

**d. Information.** Keep the claimant informed of the reason(s) for any excessive delay in the processing of his or her claim. Use any appropriate form of communication (i.e. telephone, letter or email message). Be mindful of privacy issues and security concerns. The VCE should ensure a copy of any development letter is placed in the claimant’s TIMS folder. If in lieu of a locally produced letter, the VCE communicates by telephone or email to the claimant, documentation of the conversation should also be placed in the claimant’s TIMS folder. Completing VA Form 119 is the best form to memorialize a telephonic conversation. As stated, if email is used, the VCE must ensure privacy and security concerns are followed.

**e. Burden of Proof.** While the burden of proof ultimately rests with the claimant, VA will make reasonable efforts to help the claimant obtain any evidence he or she specifically identifies, or any evidence which is reasonably suggested to exist which might enable the claimant to substantiate his or her claim. The claimant's certified statement is usually sufficient evidence to establish a point in issue. In some cases more is required. A certified statement is necessary to ensure the claimant is the person providing the information. When the VCE speaks to a claimant on the telephone, ensure it is the claimant providing the information (or a designated representative). As a reminder, if the telephone is used, the VCE should use appropriate identification protocol (i.e. verify the claimant’s address, last four digits of SSN, etc.) Do not change pertinent privacy information (i.e. direct deposit information, address change, etc.) without confirming the identity of the speaker.

The claimant's statements will be accepted as true in the absence of contradictory evidence. It is appropriate to request further evidence if there is a substantial reason to challenge a claimant's statement, i.e., something beyond mere suspicion or doubt.

**3.22 APPLYING DUTY TO ASSIST**

---

**a. Application** When information is needed, development must be done with Department of Defense (DoD), schools, Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS), Veterans Information System (VIS), Defense Personnel Retrieval Image System (DPRIS), etc. DTA requires VA to make all reasonable attempts to assist a claimant in obtaining necessary evidence to substantiate his or her claim for education benefits. Therefore, if routine attempts to obtain the information are unsuccessful, VCEs must take additional steps to substantiate the claim by providing more specific information to the claimant on what information is needed, advising the claimant what he or she needs to do, and informing the claimant of any efforts VA will take to obtain the information. If the necessary information is still not received and the claim is denied based on the evidence of record, VCEs must inform the claimant what information VA was unable to obtain, the efforts VA made to obtain this information, and that the claimant is responsible for submitting any relevant information to reopen the claim.

**3.23 WHEN NOT TO APPLY "DUTY TO ASSIST"**

---

Duty to Assist (DTA) does not apply if it is clear there is no legal basis for the claim or if undisputed facts render the claimant ineligible for benefits. If there is no possibility that any additional information or assistance will affect the determination of a claimant’s eligibility, DTA actions are not required.

**Examples of When DTA is NOT required (not an inclusive list):**

1. A VA Form 22-1990E is received requesting Chapter 33 TOE benefits for a child of a Navy Veteran. After researching in VIS the VCE notices the transferor did not transfer any entitlement to their spouse or dependent, then DTA doesn’t apply and there’s no need for further development.

2. If a Chapter 30 claimant serves a total of 18 months on active duty and receives a “General, Under Honorable Conditions” discharge, DTA doesn’t apply. Appeal rights are required, but a determination on the claim can be made without requesting any additional information.

**3.24  STEPS TAKEN APPLYING DUTY TO ASSIST**

---

**A.** VCEs should be familiar with the difference between a formal and informal claim. VCEs should ensure an application received contains the following information:

(1) The claimant’s name;

(2) The benefit claimed;

(3) His or her relationship to the Veteran, if applicable;

(4) Sufficient information for VA to verify the claimed service if applicable;

**NOTE:** While technically DTA doesn’t apply if the chosen benefit isn’t indicated on the application, the policy to assist the claimant with his or her generic request for benefits is still VA’s standard procedure.

**B.** To fulfill DTA, VCEs must make the following reasonable efforts (if applicable) to help the claimant obtain the necessary information to substantiate his or her claim:

1. When additional information is needed from a **Federal** agency—

The VCE must make as many requests as necessary to obtain the needed records or evidence. VA will stop attempting to obtain records if it is concluded the records do not exist or efforts to obtain the records would be futile.

**EXAMPLE:** A claimant’s 30D screen shows “00 INELIGIBLE” and no deductions. The VCE has requested proof from the Army that the claimant declined MGIB upon entry on active duty. The Army informed us that they do not have a DD Form 2366 in their records for the claimant. Subsequent requests would be futile. (After allowing the claimant 30 days to submit any evidence in his or her possession, the VCE should make a determination based on the available evidence. The determination can be made earlier if the claimant provides a copy of the document. )  
  
The claimant should cooperate fully with VA’s efforts to obtain records from Federal agencies, providing enough information to identify and locate the claimant’s records. Such information should include (but isn’t limited to) the identity of the agency holding the records and the approximate time frame covered by the records. If required, the claimant must authorize release of the information to VA.

**NOTE:** It is paramount under DTA, the VCE cannot make a decision of record until the Federal agency has responded that the information is unavailable. This is important even if the claimant has responded he/she does not have the information. A statement from the Federal agency must be in the file that the information is unavailable before the final decision is made.

2. When additional information is needed from a **non-Federal agency**―

VCEs must make all reasonable attempts to obtain needed records from non-Federal agencies. Generally this means one initial request and, if necessary, at least one follow-up request (unless the evidence requested doesn’t exist or it’s determined that follow-up efforts will be futile). VCEs should control the first request for 30 days and send the follow up email no earlier than the 31st day following the initial request. VCEs should remember to simultaneously develop to the claimant and advise him/her what is needed for the claim and to whom they are developing.

The claimant should cooperate fully with VA’s efforts to obtain records from non-Federal agencies, providing enough information to identify and locate the claimant’s records. Such information should include (but isn’t limited to) a contact point in a company or agency holding the records and the approximate time frame covered by the records. If required, the claimant must authorize release of the information to VA.

If, after the second request to a non-Federal entity, information isn’t available, the VCE make made a decision on the claim based on the available evidence. This is not a disallowance for failure to furnish.  
  
If an additional source for the information is discovered, the VCE must request the evidence from that source, allow 30 days for a response, and, if needed, make at least one follow-up request. If a follow-up request is sent, the VCE must control the claim for an additional 30 days.

If a claimant subsequently submits evidence within one year of the date of the original request, the VCE must re-adjudicate the claim. If the claimant is found to be eligible, VA will award retroactive benefits based upon the date of the original claim.

**NOTE:** VA cannot pay any fees that might be charged for the release of requested information or records.

**3.25  WHEN INFORMATION CANNOT BE OBTAINED**

---

**a. Notification.** After development efforts are exhausted for the purposes of obtaining relevant records, a VCE must notify the claimant that VA is unable to obtain the record. VCEs must include the following information during the notification process:

1. Identify the records VA is unable to obtain

2. Briefly describe the efforts made by VA to obtain such records

3. Explain that the VA will decide the claim based on the evidence of record but that the claimant may always provide records with relevant information to update their eligibility status at a later date

4. Notice that the claimant is ultimately responsible for obtaining the evidence. You should add the paragraph found in [Figure 3.01](#f301) into the award or denial letter when a decision is rendered based on the evidence of record and edit the highlighted parts for what was requested and to whom VA sent to the request

**b. Denial action.** It is imperative VCEs deny the claim based on evidence of record. The VCE cannot deny the claim because of failure to furnish evidence which is available at another agency. The correct decision is to deny for an appropriate reason. The VCE should ensure the denial letter is suppressed in LTS or BDN and use the appropriate PCGL letter. This letter is clear in the reason for the denial and reiterates who was contacted to assist in gathering the needed information. (Refer to [Figure 3.01](#f301) for an example)

**NOTE:** If the VCE can decide in the claimant’s favor and award part of the request, he should. Do not deny the entire claim.

**EXAMPLE:** Claimant applies for Chapter 30 benefits and indicates on the application he is eligible for a kicker. He has not provided a copy of his kicker contract. After confirming with DOD, the VCE cannot confirm the kicker eligibility. VCE can establish eligibility to Chapter 30 benefits and awards appropriately. Confirmation cannot be received from DOD on the kicker information. The denial is only for the additional kicker amount.

**3.26  REASONABLE DOUBT RULE**

---

a. The reasonable doubt rule is found at [38 CFR 3.102](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.1.3_1102). Every person involved in the processing of claims must be thoroughly familiar with this regulation.

b. It is understood that if there is a balance of evidence for and against the claim, the VCE should favor the claimant.

After obtaining all relevant evidence, the VCE must evaluate the evidence and determine if the evidence in favor of the position held by the claimant is of equal or greater weight than the evidence to the contrary. If the evidence supports the position of the claimant, the claim is allowed. If the evidence does not support the claimant, the claim is disallowed. If the evidence is approximately balanced, resolve doubt in favor of the claimant.

**3.27  PRIMARY AND SECONDARY EVIDENCE**

---

**a. Primary Evidence.** In most instances entitlement to VA benefits can be established by any evidence which is of sufficient weight to convince the VCE of the point in issue. However, for purposes of establishing certain events, e.g., marriage, child's relationship, divorce, or death, VA regulations require specific types of evidence.

(1) If there is conflicting information or a protest by an interested party, there may be only one acceptable form of proof of an event. For example, under [38 CFR 3.205(b)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.1.3_1205) the only acceptable documentary proof of dissolution of a marriage (other than by death) is a certified copy or abstract of a final decree of divorce or annulment.

(2) In other instances, e.g., marriage and child's relationship, VA regulations specify primary and secondary forms of evidence. A copy of the public record of marriage, birth or adoption is considered to be primary evidence of marriage or the child's relationship. Normally, primary evidence of the event is required to establish marriage or the relationship of a child. However, under certain circumstances, secondary evidence can suffice to establish marriage or a child's relationship.

**b. Secondary Evidence.** Secondary evidence of an event is any evidence which does not qualify as primary evidence. Consider secondary evidence only after all attempts to obtain primary evidence have been unsuccessful and the claimant has given a satisfactory explanation why primary evidence is not available.

Acceptable reasons for unavailability of primary evidence include evidence the primary record was destroyed and no copy exists or evidence has shown no official documentary evidence of the event was ever prepared. The mere fact the claimant does not remember where the primary evidence is located is not an acceptable reason for resorting to secondary evidence.

NOTE: Any time a marriage or child’s relationship has been “deemed valid” for another benefit in VA, it will be accepted as true for all Education benefits. Do not develop for proof of dependency if another station within VA has proven the relationship.

**3.28  BURDEN OF PROOF AND THE WEIGHING OF EVIDENCE**

---

Education Service has coordinated with Compensation Service to ensure VCEs understand how to develop for information on a claimant’s burden of proof and the weighing of evidence. This includes [responsibilities of VA and claimants for securing evidence and accepting entries a claimant makes on *VA Form 21-686c* as proof of an event](http://www.knowva.ebenefits.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_ss/#2a), and [evaluating and weighing evidence.](http://www.knowva.ebenefits.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_ss/#2c)

VA must make reasonable efforts to assist a claimant in securing evidence, but the claimant *always* has the initial burden of proof. This means that unless the claimant furnishes evidence on each element needed to establish the point at issue, the VCE must deny his/her claim.

**EXAMPLE:** A claimant alleging the existence of a deemed-valid marriage must meet the requirements in [38 CFR 3.52](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.1.3_152) to establish the marriage as valid for VA purposes. If the claimant fails to provide evidence showing he/she meets those requirements, the VCE must deny his/her claim. Nevertheless, the VCE may, because of its duty to assist, provide reasonable assistance to secure the evidence.

Except as noted in [38 CFR 3.204(a)(2)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.1.3_1204), VA will accept the entries a claimant or beneficiary makes on [*VA Form 22-1990 or any proper form*](http://vbaw.vba.va.gov/bl/20/cio/20s5/forms/VBA-21-686c-ARE.pdf) as sufficient proof of

* marriage
* dissolution of a marriage
* birth of a child
* introduction of a stepchild into a Veteran’s family, or
* death of a dependent

***Note:*** Unless there are inconsistencies in a claimant’s statement, the policy described in the above paragraph allows VCEs to establish the existence of a familial relationship between a Veteran and another individual *without* reviewing the claims folder. It is appropriate to request further evidence from a claimant if there is substantial reason to challenge his/her entries on VA Form 22-1990. (A substantial reason is something beyond mere suspicion or doubt.)

Once all procurable evidence is of record, the VCE must evaluate the competency, credibility, and persuasiveness of the evidence, and determine if the competent and credible evidence in favor of the claimant’s position is of equal or greater weight than the evidence to the contrary.

Use the table below to determine whether or not a point is established.

|  |  |
| --- | --- |
| **If scales weighing the evidence …** | **Then …** |
| tip in favor of the claimant | the point is established. |
| tip against the claimant | the point is ***not*** established. |
| are approximately balanced | resolve reasonable doubt in favor of the claimant. |

**3.29  PHOTOCOPIES**

---

**a. General.** Copies or abstracts of public documents, e.g., marriage certificates, birth certificates, death certificates, are acceptable as evidence if VA is satisfied the copies are genuine and free from alteration or defect. Otherwise, VA may request a copy of the document certified over the signature and official seal of the person having custody of such record.

**b. Military Service.** Copies of original service documents are acceptable only if issued to the claimant by the service department or by a public custodian of records.

**3.30  NEW AND RELEVANT EVIDENCE**

---

**a.** A claimant must submit "new and relevant" evidence to reopen a previously disallowed claim.

(1) To qualify as "new", evidence, whether documentary, testimonial or in some other form, must be submitted to VA for the first time.

(2) A photocopy or other duplication of information already contained in a VA claims folder does not constitute new evidence since it was previously considered. In addition, information confirming a point already established should not be considered “new” evidence.

**b.** In order to be considered "relevant", the additional information must bear directly and substantially on the specific matter under consideration.

**c.** A determination by VA that information constitutes "new and relevant evidence" means the new information is sufficiently significant, either by itself or in connection with evidence already of record, that it must be considered in order to decide the merits of the claim fairly. It does not mean the evidence warrants a revision of a prior determination.

**d.** A decision not to reopen a claim because the evidence submitted is not new and relevant is an appealable decision. The claimant must be furnished notice of procedural and appellate rights.

**e.** If a previous decision has been made on a benefit and the factual basis remains unchanged, then the new claim should be treated as a duplicate claim.  As such, the VCE should advise the Veteran/claimant that the previous decision (citing the date of the RPO’s decision letter) was the final decision on that claim.  Supplemental end product credit for benefits previously claimed and decided **will** **not** be taken.  Issuing the same adjudicative decision also resets appellate rights, and not allowed since the prior decision did not change.

**Example:**  Veteran was denied Chapter 30 eligibility in 2014 due to reaching his delimiting date.  VA received an application on December 1, 2022, from the same Veteran applying for Chapter 30.  VCE should advise the claimant of the previous denial decision, included in the letter back in 2014 and not take end product credit.

**NOTE:** The application should not be considered the submission of evidence.  Subsequent applications without new and relevent evidence received following denied or claims with exhausted or expired eligibility should not receive a formal decision or denial in response. The appropriate informational letter explaining the claim was previously denied, entitlement exhausted, or beyond delimiting date should be sent without notice of procedural and appellate rights. Since these are not supplemental claims, supplemental claim work credit is not appropriate. 

**3.31  AFFIDAVITS OR CERTIFICATIONS IN SUPPORT OF CLAIM**

---

**a. General.** If affidavits or certifications are required by VA regulations or procedures, the requirement may be satisfied by completing a VA form containing the certification statement. Enclose the appropriate VA form with the request for evidence.

**b. Use of VA Form 21-4138.** If available VA forms are not appropriate, an individual's signed statement on VA Form 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim, or any other written communication with the appropriate certification, is acceptable.

**Additional information regarding the VCAA can be found on the below link:**

<http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-106publ475/html/PLAW-106publ475.htm>

BVA decisions regarding the Veterans Claims Assistance Act (VCAA):

<http://www.bva.va.gov/docs/VLR_VOL3/6-GriffinAndJones-VCAA-TenYearsLaterPages284-321.pdf>

<http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/USCODE-2011-title38/html/USCODE-2011-title38-partIV-chap51-subchapI-sec5103A.htm>

**Figure 3.01 DTA Denial Letter Template**

---

**DUTY TO ASSIST PARAGRAPH**

After a review of your claim for education benefits, VA needed additional information to assist your claim. The following information was requested and needed in order to assist your claim:

An attempt by the VA to obtain, additional evidence on your behalf was unsuccessful. VA requested records from Department of Defense (DoD), yourself, as well as [add additional requests] The VA has made all reasonable efforts to obtain the necessary information to substantiate your claim.

To further your claim for VA education benefits, you must send the evidence requested in the above paragraph. In that case, we'll review the evidence and notify you if our original decision has changed.

To further your claim for VA educational benefits, you must send the evidence requested in the above paragraph. In that case, we'll review the evidence and notify you if our original decision has changed.

---

SEE ATTACHMENT BELOW TO VIEW PREVIOUS VERSION OF THIS M22-4 CHAPTER