# CHAPTER 4. STRATEGIC OVERSIGHT AND ANALYSIS REVIEW

**﻿﻿CHAPTER 4. STRATEGIC OVERSIGHT AND ANALYSIS REVIEW**

September 6, 2023

﻿

**SUBCHAPTER I. GENERAL**

[4.01 Purpose](#401)

[4.02 Scope](#402)

[4.03 Responsibility](#403)

[4.04 Analyses](#404)

[4.05 Scheduling Improvement Actions](#405)

**SUBCHAPTER II. TOPICS AND MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS**

[4.06 Required and Suggested Topics](#406)

[4.07 Minimum Requirements](#407)

**SUBCHAPTER III. SOAR SCHEDULE AND REPORTS**

[4.08 SOAR Report Format](#408)

[4.09 Sample SOAR Report Format](#409)

**FIGURES**

[4.1 Sample SOAR Report Format](#F41)

---

**CHAPTER 4.** **STRATEGIC OVERSIGHT AND ANALYSIS REVIEW**

**SUBCHAPTER I. GENERAL**

**BACKGROUND**

Historically, Systematic Analyses of Operations (SAO) were prepared by each Regional Processing Office (RPO) to assess internal controls, identify any potential issues, and recommend solutions.  Effective October 1, 2023, Central Office will transition from a SAO format to the Strategic Oversight and Analysis Review (SOAR) format.

---

**4.01 PURPOSE**

**a.** SOARs are tools which management uses to test and assess internal controls, identify potential deficiencies, and enact corrective actions. The requirements in this chapter complement existing departmental internal control guidelines.

**b.** SOARs compare achieved performance levels with program standards. The SOAR assesses effectiveness and adherence, monitors progress towards goals and objectives, identifies areas of vulnerability, provides and implements recommendations for improvement, and evaluates progress towards operational goals.

---

**4.02 SCOPE**

**a.** In addition to the required topics indicated in Subchapter II, SOARs encompass all Education Division activities. For example, SOARs of education issues are used to: 

* determine the degree of program effectiveness and efficiency through appraisal of organization, staffing, manpower use, funds, and other resources;
* identify areas for improvement in rendering service to beneficiaries; or
* perform gap analysis with regard to performance measures quality assurance

**b.** The time allotted to a SOAR should be in proportion to the size and complexity of the activity under review

---

**4.03 RESPONSIBILITY**

The Education Officer is responsible for ensuring all SOARs are completed accurately and timely for the activities under his or her jurisdiction, consistent with the requirements of this chapter, and with station policies.

For claims processing and customer service activities in the Regional Processing Office (RPO), supervisory personnel or program/management analysts assigned to the RPO should perform the SOARs.  Non-supervisory personnel should not ordinarily perform them.

Signed copies of all SOAR reports should be emailed to the Executive Management Team within 30 days of due date. If a request for additional time is made, a Memorandum for Record should be emailed to document the change to the deadline.

---

**4.04 ANALYSES**

**a.** In performing an SOAR, keep in mind the following principles:

* Approach your analysis in a positive manner
* Base your analysis on pertinent statistical data and performance standards
* Conduct your analysis objectively and impartially
* Present critical comments in an informative manner
* Identify and analyze problems, rather than find fault with individuals or units
* Specifically identify the causes of deficiencies
* Propose appropriate corrective actions to be taken
* Place primary emphasis on improving future performance, rather than on criticizing the past

   
**b.** The following are examples of what to consider when performing an SOAR:

EXAMPLE 1:

* Does performance conform to established program standards?
* If not, how great is the deficiency, and what are its causes?
* How can those causes be counteracted to improve performance?

   
EXAMPLE 2:

* Is the manpower expended consistent with the quantitative and/or qualitative results obtained?
* If not, do the existing organization and procedures allow for the most effective and efficient use of manpower?
* If not, what organizational or procedural changes would improve effectiveness or efficiency?

EXAMPLE 3:

* Is quality or efficiency lowered by shortage or improper use of skills, equipment, supplies, etc.?
* If so, what changes are needed to provide better or more efficient service?

---

**4.05 SCHEDULING IMPROVEMENT ACTIONS**

**a.**Whenever significant opportunities for improvement as the result of SOARs, be specific in terms of what is expected and when it is to be accomplished.

* Assign responsibility for local projects to specific individuals or units
* Develop plans of action
* Set the time frame for accomplishment of corrective actions
* Provide needed staff assistance

**b.** Include any specific plans for corrective actions, as well as documentation of the actual results of those actions, in the SOAR file.

---

**SUBCHAPTER II. TOPICS AND MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS**

**4.06 REQUIRED AND SUGGESTED TOPICS**

| **TITLE/SUBJECT OF ANALYSIS** | **FREQUENCY** | **PERIOD COVERED** | **\*DUE TO RPO DIRECTOR** | **\*DUE TO EDUCATION SERVICE** |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Work-Study | Annual (Only Muskogee RPO) | August 1 - July 31 | September 15 | October 15 |
| Committee on Waivers and Compromises | Annual (Only Buffalo RPO) | October 1- September 30 | December 15 | January 15 |
| Education Call Center | Annual (Only Education Call Center) | October 1- March 31 | May 15 | June 15 |
| Large One Time Payments | Annual | October 1- September 30 | November 15 | December 15 |
| Workflow and Management Control | Annual | October 1- September 30 | November 15 | December 15 |
| Sensitive Files and Employee Access | Annual | October 1-September 30 | November 15 | December 15 |
| Quality of Education Claims Processing | Annual | October 1-September 30 | November 15 | December 15 |
| Administrative Errors | Annual | October 1-September 30 | November 15 | December 15 |
| Upstream | Annual | October 1-September 30 | November 15 | December 15 |

**\*Due dates are based on calendar dates.  If the due date falls on a Saturday, the report is due the day prior. If** **the due date falls on a Sunday, the report is due the following date.**

---

**4.07 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS**

For the SOARs listed in subchapter II, the minimum review and analysis elements are listed below:

**a.**   **Work-Study SOAR (Muskogee RPO only)**

For the defined period, an analysis of data and trends should be conducted covering the following topics at a minimum:

* Analysis of timeliness of application and time records
* Analysis of local work-study quality
* Analysis of workload volume (receipts and inquiries)
* Analysis of Workload Flow and Management
* Staffing & Structure

**b.**   **Committee on Waivers and Compromises (COWC) SOAR (Buffalo RPO only)**

For the defined period, an analysis of data and trends should be conducted covering the following topics, at a minimum:

* Analysis of timeliness
* Analysis of quality (local and national results)
* Staffing
* Analysis of productivity
* Analysis of training
* Analysis of workload management

**c. Education Call Center SOAR (Education Call Center only)**

For the defined, period an analysis of data and trends should be conducted covering the following topics at a minimum:

* Review /analysis of Abandoned Call data along with a comparison to the prior 6 month period.
* Analysis of ECC Quality
* Staffing and Structure
* Customer Relationship Management Software (CRM) including call driver charts
* Customer Satisfaction Score
* Analysis of traffic patterns and staffing, average wait time and attempts by weekday.

**d.** **Large One Time Payments SOAR**

For the defined period, an analysis of data and trends should be conducted covering the following areas:

* Review the number of cases requiring review by the Director’s Office (based on emails sent to the EDUPMT corporate mailbox)
* Review the accuracy of the payment (i.e. is there documentation in the file to support the payment, did the action follow current Big Pay guidance and was the payment amount correct)
* Analyze Trends

 **e**. **Workflow and Management Control SOAR**

For the defined period an analysis of data and trends should be conducted covering the following topics, at a minimum:

* Analysis of mail receipt (electronic and paper)
* Analysis of mail control time
* Analysis of Claims Processing
* Analysis of Inquiries (to include congressional inquiries)
* Analysis of effectiveness of WIPP/Workload Plan

**f.** **Sensitive Files and Employee Access SOAR**

For the defined period, an analysis of data and trends should be conducted covering the following topics, at a minimum:

* Review the requirements for assigning employee access to sensitive folders at the various levels in TIMS and compare to actual practice
* Review actual number of employees with sensitive access in BDN and TIMS to established guidelines.
* Review the requirement for processing of employee claims as compared to actual practice
* Discuss number of access violations (as reported by ISO)

**g.** **Quality of Education Claims Processing SOAR**

For the defined period, an analysis of data and trends should be conducted covering the following topics, at a minimum:

* Education Service Statistical Quality Control (SQC) claims processing accuracy rate and error trends
* Local quality review analysis to include RPO quality averages, error trends
* Comparison of station SQC vs local SQC quality results
* Local review process to include selection of cases and appeals process

**h. Administrative Errors SOAR**

For the defined period, an analysis of data and trends should be conducted covering the following topics, at a minimum:

* Analysis of the total number of Administrative Errors and total cost during review period.
* Analysis of the total number of Administrative Errors and cost by benefit.
* Review of the types of errors categorized by payment, eligibility, entitlement and other.

**i. Upstream SOAR**

For the defined period, an analysis of data and trends should be conducted covering the following topics, at a minimum:

* Team structure and staffing
* Timeliness- Control Time
* Upstream receipts (electronic vs paper)
* Drop mail
* Folder Corrections
* Workload Management
* Military mail and paper files
* Folder Transfer Process
* VBA Directive 6300 compliance
* Returned mail

---

**SUBCHAPTER III. SOAR REPORTS**

**4.08 SOAR REPORT FORMAT**

The Sample Format shown in Figure 4.01 is appropriate for all SOARs.  However, an RPO may determine the specific report format locally and adjust it to meet special needs. 

Ensure that each SOAR states clearly what was reviewed, the time period covered, and how the review was conducted.  Analyze deviations from the manual, changes from previous reviews, noteworthy accomplishments, major problems, and anticipated trends.

Support all conclusions with statistical data, factual information and evidence, and explanations of causes.  Identify and explain proposed solutions to noted problems as well as issues and questions needing further study. Lastly discuss current status of areas noted as problems in the prior review of the topic.

---

**4.09 SAMPLE SOAR REPORT FORMAT**

**1. Subject.**  Use the title assigned for the required and suggested SOARs listed above.  For other SOARs, choose a short phrase that describes the area reviewed. 

**2.** **Scope and Method.**  State the data reviewed, the time period covered, and the methodology or means by which the analysis was conducted.

**3. Findings** 

a.  Concisely state what was found on review that needs corrective action. 

b.  If applicable, state findings in terms of broad statistical statements.  (EXAMPLE:  80 percent of original claims received in the first quarter of FY 2020 were completed in less than 30 days.) 

c.  To show detailed findings, use exhibits consolidating statistical findings or use charts, graphs, or figures which support narrative statements.

 **4.  Conclusions and Recommendations** 

a.  State a firm conclusion, either favorable or unfavorable, based upon what the findings demonstrate. 

b.  If problems were found, make recommendations for resolving them.  If there are no recommendations, state “No Recommendations”.

**Figure 4.1**

|  |
| --- |
| **SAMPLE SOAR REPORT FORMAT**    **1. Subject.** Use the title assigned for the required and suggested SOARs listed above. For other SOARs, choose a short phrase that describes the area reviewed.    **2. Scope and Method.** State the data reviewed, the time period covered, and the methodology or means by which the analysis was conducted.    **3. Findings.**  a. Concisely state what was found on review that needs corrective action.   b.  If applicable, state findings in terms of broad statistical statements.  (EXAMPLE:  80 percent of original claims received in the first quarter of FY 2020 were completed in less than 30 days.)   c.  To show detailed findings, use exhibits consolidating statistical findings or use charts, graphs, or figures which support narrative statements.    **4. Conclusions and Recommendations.**  a. State a firm conclusion, either favorable or unfavorable, based upon what the findings demonstrate.  b. If problems were found, make recommendations for resolving them. If there are no recommendations, say so. |