# Part 9: Chapter 3 - Review of Approvals - Specific Criteria for Institutions of Higher Learning and Noncollege Degree Institutions

****Part 9: Chapter 3 - Review of Approvals - Specific Criteria for Institutions of Higher Learning and Non-College Degree Institutions****

[**Subchapter 1. General**](#SI)  
[3.01  Measurement Of Courses](#301)  
[3.02  Higher Competency](#302)  
[3.03  Multiple Objectives](#303)  
[3.04 External Graduation Requirements](#_3.04_EXTERNAL_GRADUATION_REQUIREMENTS)  
[3.05  Optional Courses](#304)  
[3.06  Precluded Courses](#305)  
[3.07  Contracted Courses](#306)  
[3.08  Practical Training](#307)  
[3.09  Cooperative Training](#308)  
  
[**Subchapter 2. Institutions of Higher Learning**](#SII)  
[3.10  Remedial/Deficiency Courses](#309)  
[3.11  Pro Rata Refund Policy](#310)  
[3.12  Programs Pursued In More Than One State](#311)  
[3.13  Individualized Curriculum](#312)  
[3.14  Programs To Prepare For Exams](#313)  
[3.15  Variable Credit](#314)  
[3.16  Credit By Exam And Life Experience](#315)  
[3.17  Reserve Officer Training Corps](#316)  
[3.18  Post-Doctoral Courses](#317)  
[3.19  Clinical Pastoral Education](#318)  
[3.20  Independent Study](#319)  
  
[**Subchapter 3. Non-College Degree Institutions**](#SIII)  
[3.21  Length Of Course](#320)  
[3.22  Standards Of Attendance](#321)  
[3.23  Farm Cooperative](#322)

**SUBCHAPTER I:  GENERAL**

**3.01  MEASUREMENT OF COURSES**

---

**a.  Measurement of IHL Courses.** The procedures for determining training time based on the academic loads of VA students in IHL (Institution of Higher Learning) programs are in part IV, chapter 6.  VCEs (Veterans Claims Examiners) are responsible for determining training time.  ELRs (Education Liaison Representatives) are responsible for providing information or clarifying existing information to insure that VCEs are able to make the correct decisions.

(1)  ELRs will indicate in WEAMS (Web Enabled Approval Management System) the type of measurement that is appropriate and the minimum number of hours required for full-time measurement.

(2)  Discrepancies between information contained on enrollment certifications and information in WEAMS should be referred to the ELR of jurisdiction for resolution.

**b.  Measurement of NCD Courses**

(1)  The procedures for determining training time based on the academic load of VA students enrolled in NCD (Non-College Degree) programs are in part IV, chapter 7.  VCEs are responsible for determining training time.  ELRs are responsible for providing the information or clarifying existing information to insure that VCEs are able to make the correct decisions.

(2)  NCD courses offered by IHLs may be measured in clock hours or credit hours.  (See pt. IV, par. 7.01 through 7.03.)  In certain cases, NCD courses offered on a standard quarter or semester-hour basis by schools other than IHLs may be measured on a credit hour basis.  Schools must require at least 22 clock hours of instruction per week for courses where shop practice is an integral part of the course or 18 clock hours per week if class and theory instruction are more than 50 percent of the required hours.  ELRs are responsible for determining that NCD courses offered at IHLs satisfy all applicable criteria for measurement on a credit hour basis.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**3.02  HIGHER COMPETENCY**

---

SAAs (State Approving Agencies) may not approve programs designed to attain a higher level of competency and proficiency or to keep abreast of current developments. VA may award benefits for such programs only if they are required for approved degree programs or approved postdoctoral certificates being pursued by VA students.  For example, the Naval War College offers a Naval War College diploma to enhance the knowledge of commissioned officers.  This program may not be approved because it does not lead to an educational, professional, or vocational objective.  However, programs that add skills required for a profession or vocation may be approved.  For example, SAAs may approve training in transmission servicing for auto mechanics who have not received training in transmission servicing.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**3.03  MULTIPLE OBJECTIVES**

---

**General.**  VA students may pursue programs of education leading to more than one educational, professional, or vocational objective. See M22-4, Part III, Chapter 6, Section 6.04(d-e) and M22-1, Part IX, Subpart ii, 4.B.2.b for additional information.

1. **SAA Actions.**  The objectives do not necessarily have to be on the same professional or technical level; however, depending on the combination, specific SAA approval may be required. As defined in [38 CFR 21.7020(b)(23)(ii)](https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-38/chapter-I/part-21/subpart-K/subject-group-ECFRfd3f2192af1938b/section-21.7020), a program of education “may consist of subjects or courses which fulfill requirements for more than one objective if all objectives pursued are generally recognized as being related to a single career field.” When specific SAA approval is required, SAAs review both objectives to ensure they align.

1. **Dual Objectives**. VA benefits are payable to students who concurrently pursue two different objectives (e.g., a degree and a certificate) at the same school. Even though specific SAA approval is required for dual objectives, inconsistent practices and confusion surrounding dual objective approval requirements have been discovered. While in the process of actively remedying this inconsistency, VA will allow sufficient time for SCOs to submit programs for approval and SAAs to approve them. Effective January 1, 2026, dual objectives must have specific approval before benefits can be paid (see M22-4, Part III, Chapter 6, Section 6.04d). In the meantime, SCOs should submit dual objective approval requests to the SAA and continue to certify VA students currently enrolled in dual objective programs using the same certification method for dual degrees using VBA/custom remarks (see M22-1, Part IX, Subpart ii, 4.B.2.b).
2. **Dual Degrees**. VA benefits are payable to students who concurrently pursue two different approved degrees at the same school. Each program must be approved by the SAA; however, specific approval for dual degrees is NOT required.
3. **Dual Majors and Major/Minor Combinations**. Students may pursue a dual major or a minor as part of a single objective. SAAs do NOT need to approve dual majors or minors even if pursuit requires the student to extend the length of their program beyond what is normally required for graduation.

**[Back to Top](##Top)**

**3.04 EXTERNAL GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS**

---

A school may have a graduation requirement that is not part of the State Approving Agency's approved program as long as it does not require additional training.  These are typically an exam for certification or license.

**[Back to Top](##Top)**

**3.05  OPTIONAL COURSES**

---

SAAs may not approve optional courses that schools do not require for completion of educational, professional, or vocational objectives.  For example, a school offers an Associate of Applied Science program.  The degree can be awarded after the first two years.  The school offers students the option of attending an additional quarter to take ancillary flight training.  SAAs may not approve the additional quarter because the school does not require the flight training for the degree nor is it considered as a degree requirement.  VA students do, however, retain the option of matriculating into an additional degree program that includes these "optional courses" as part of the total degree requirements.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**3.06  PRECLUDED COURSES**

---

**a.  General.** [Title 38 U.S.C. 3680A](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3680a edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3680a)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) precludes the enrollment of VA students in certain courses that do not lead to valid educational objectives or are not creditable to such objectives.  This applies to both IHL and NCD courses.  Enrollment in any courses offered by radio will not be approved.

**b.  Precluded IHL Courses.** Avocational courses such as personality development, recreational dance, horseback riding, swimming, fishing, skiing, golf, etc., may not be approved.  Physical education courses may be approved.  NCD courses in photography, art, and music may not be approved unless the course content is clearly vocational in nature.  Degree courses of these types can be approved because they are educational objectives.

**c.  Precluded NCD Courses.**

(1)  Bar tending and personality development are precluded.

(2)  Avocational and recreational courses may not be approved.  If the schools use advertising for courses with predominantly avocational or recreational themes, SAAs may consider the courses as avocational or recreational.  The following is a partial list of such courses:

(i)  Any photography courses or entertainment courses.

(ii)  Any music courses (instrumental or vocal), personality development, or courses in dance, sports or athletics, such as horseback riding, swimming, fishing, skiing, golf, baseball, tennis, bowling, sports officiating, or other sports or athletic courses.

*NOTE:  These courses should not be confused with courses in these areas at IHLs that may be pursued as part of degree programs.  Such IHL courses, whether taken as  creditable electives or as part of major programs, are NOT precluded.*

(3)  To overcome the presumption that courses are avocational or recreational in character, VA students will be required to establish that the courses will be of bona fide use in the pursuit of their present or contemplated businesses or occupations.  (See pt. III, chapter 7, subchapter I, for additional information on precluded courses.)

(4)  Self improvement courses are precluded.  (See pt. III, par. 7.01e for information on self-improvement courses.)

[Back to Top](##Top)

**3.07  CONTRACTED COURSES**

---

When schools have contracts or any other types of agreement with other organizations to provide training required for the completion of courses, SAAs must approve the arrangements.

**a. General.** 38 United States Code (U.S.C.) 3680A sets out conditions for the approval of enrollment in courses for GI Bill benefits. Specifically, subsection (f) states the Secretary may not approve the enrollment of an eligible Veteran in a course if the course is provided under contract by another educational institution and the educational institution providing the course under contract has not obtained approval for the course. The contractor may offer the training in whole or in part. The State Approving Agency when determining whether a program can be offered under contract must review the contract and determine if quality instruction is being provided (exception 38 USC 3680A(f)(2) - study abroad arrangements.)

b. **IHL Contract with Out-of-State Flight School**. If an IHL is contracting with a vocational flight school in a different state, and the vocational flight school is offering training that will apply to the IHL degree, VA will permit the SAA that has authority of the IHL to provide program approval and accept the contracted training if the vocational flight school has its own separate approval (as a vocational flight school) and the SAA that has jurisdiction for the flight school provides consent to the SAA of the IHL, indicating the vocational flight school may provide this training that applies to the student’s IHL degree. The SAA that has jurisdiction of the vocational flight school will determine what is required of the vocational flight school in order to give this consent to the SAA of the IHL. The form of the consent will be left to the discretion of the SAA of the IHL. 

The SAA of the IHL retains approval authority and will approve the program and the actual contracts. The SAA must ensure the program is being taught in the same manner in each of the contracted flight schools.

The SAA of the IHL must list the name and address of the flight training provider (as documented in flight school’s WEAMS approval) in their approval letter (therefore the SAA of the NCD vocational flight school has given consent for their flight school to offer training that applies to the IHL degree).  If the contracted training SAA has denied consent, then the SAA of the IHL shall also list each flight school location where IHL contracted training is not permitted.

If there are flight training providers listed in the SAA of the IHL’s approval letter, VA will issue a “sub-facility code” for each of the approved training locations (an x in the third digit, an F in the fourth digit and the two-digit state code is the state where the IHL is located).  A tracking sheet will notate the assigned sub-facility code to keep track the order of assigned codes. However, this site is not required to be approved by the IHL SAA or the NCD SAA as an extension campus.  The SAA of the IHL has authority to accept that the training provider may provide training that applies to a degree program approved, and it is not required to fit VA extension campus requirements. 

This is limited to the contracted situation noted above.  This is not how every IHL contract works; intrastate IHL contracted entities would not need these special arrangements because there are no other SAAs involved.  Where the contracted training is for the same level (IHL to IHL, NCD to NCD) this guidance would not be necessary because the SAA of the contracted entity is already aware the school is providing IHL training or NCD training.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**3.08  PRACTICAL TRAINING**

---

**a.  General.** Schools have many names for practical training, cooperative training, and independent study, e.g., internships, work experience, externships, work study, etc.  For example, schools might describe courses as cooperative even though they meet VA's definition of practical training.  The regulation that most benefits VA students will be used as long as the courses meet the approval requirements

**b.  Medical and Dental Residencies.**

(1) SAAs may approve accredited medical residencies, osteopathic residencies and internships, and dental residencies leading to certification by the appropriate medical or dental accrediting association

(2)  The appropriate accrediting agencies are:

        (i)  The American Osteopathic Association.

(ii)  The Commission on Dental Accreditation of the American Dental Association.

(3)  Residency programs:

(i)  Must lead to certification by an appropriate Specialty or Subspecialty Board, the American Osteopathic Association, or the American Dental Association; and.

(ii)  Will not include a period of practice following completion of the education requirements even though the accrediting agency requires the practice.

(iii)  Residencies in podiatric medicine may be approved and recognized as institutional training only when they have been approved by the Council on Podiatry Education of the American Podiatry Association.

(iv)  Courses accredited by the American Psychoanalytic Association.

*NOTE:  The American Psychoanalytic Association accredits courses designed to train people with Doctor of Medicine degrees to become psychoanalysts.  As long as these courses do not include residencies, they may be approved as leading to the professional objective of psychoanalyst.  VA recognizes these courses as accredited even though the U.S. Secretary of Education does not recognize this association as an accrediting agency.  Measurement is on a clock hour basis, "R" type hours, 40 hours per week is full-time*.

(v)  Courses accredited by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education or where the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education has delegated accrediting authority, the appropriate Residency Review Committee.

*NOTE:  VA recognizes these courses as accredited even though the U.S. Secretary of Education does not recognize the council as an accrediting agency.  Measurement is on a clock hour basis, "R" type hours, 40 hours per week is full-time.*

(4)  In most specialties, the AMA (American Medical Association) has replaced internships with three or four year residencies.  The AMA recognizes a Transition Year Residency that provides experience in a variety of areas similar to courses previously called internships and is required for some specialties.

(5)  Postdoctoral certificate courses, including fellowships, offered by accredited colleges, universities, and hospitals are educational objectives.

(6)  Nursing courses are institutional training when they are offered by schools or hospitals, are accredited, or meet the licensing requirements of the state where they are taught.  The clinical portions are considered to be in resident, institutional training when:

(i)  The students remain enrolled in the schools or hospitals;

(ii)  The schools require the training for completion of the courses; and

(iii)  The training is under the supervision of the schools or hospitals.

(7)  Effective October 29, 1992, nurse's aide courses may be approved if they are approved by the appropriate state agencies as meeting the requirements prescribed by the US Secretary of Health and Human Services under sections 1819(f)(2)(A)(i) and 1919(f)(2)(A)(i) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-3(f)(2)(A)(i) and [1396r(f)(2)(A)(i)).]  ELRs should accept certifications by SAAs that the requirements are met.

**c.  Medical and Dental Specialty Courses.**

(1)  Medical and dental courses that are not primarily clerical, administrative, or secretarial in nature are covered by [38 CFR 21.4265(c)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=067bb4cdbda744531441f897b75461df&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14265).  Clerical, administrative, and secretarial courses may be approved as other practical training, if they meet the requirements of [38 CFR 21.4265(f)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=067bb4cdbda744531441f897b75461df&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14265).  (See subpar. 3.12g below.)  Some examples of medical and dental specialty courses are X-ray technician, medical technician, records administrator, medical assistant, and veterinarian technician.

(2)  The [regulations differentiate] between medical and dental specialty courses offered by schools and courses offered by hospitals [[38 CFR 21.4265(c)]](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=067bb4cdbda744531441f897b75461df&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14265) .  Courses offered by accredited and non-accredited schools and accredited hospitals may be approved as institutional training.  Courses offered by non-accredited hospitals may be approved as OJT (On Job Training) or apprenticeship, if they meet the requirements of [38 CFR 21.4262](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=385c07c911f69d9820b4799bc2be0199&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14262) or [38 CFR21.4261](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=385c07c911f69d9820b4799bc2be0199&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14261).  Courses offered by non-accredited hospitals that operate schools, e.g., a School of Radiological Technology, are considered to be institutional training, if the training is institutional in nature rather than OJT.  Training must consist of structured classes and may include clinical training, if it is theoretical in nature rather than OJT.  The schools must be recognized as schools by the state, e.g., licensed as schools.

(3)  Clinical training offered by accredited and non-accredited schools and accredited hospitals is institutional, resident training and should be measured on a credit hour or a clock hour basis.

        (4)  Clinical training in a physician's or dentist's office is institutional training, if it is part of accredited courses that are offered by schools.

**e.  Medical and Dental Assistants Courses at VA Medical Centers.**

ELRs may approve full-time physicians' assistant or full-time expanded function dental auxiliary (formerly referred to as dentists' assistants) courses as institutional, resident training, if they are conducted at VA medical centers or in facilities under contracts with VA medical centers.  (See [38 CFR 21.4265(d)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=385c07c911f69d9820b4799bc2be0199&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14265) . The courses do not have to meet the requirements of [38 CFR 21.4265(c)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=067bb4cdbda744531441f897b75461df&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14265).

**f.  Professional Training Courses**.

(1) (See RPO Letter 22-06-08) Practical training for professional objectives is considered to be resident, institutional training when offered by accredited and non-accredited schools, or accredited hospitals.  VA will measure the practical training portions of the courses the same way as it measures the classroom portions, or in clock hours, if clock hour measurement is more beneficial to the VA students.

(2)  Some examples of professional objectives are teachers, lawyers, certified public accountants, certified architects, and ministers, priests, or rabbis. 

**g.  Other Practical Training Courses.**  The requirements for the approval of other practical training courses are in [38 CFR 21.4265(f)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=385c07c911f69d9820b4799bc2be0199&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14265).  All the requirements are not repeated in this paragraph.  Courses that do not meet the approval requirements as other practical training may meet the approval requirements as cooperative training or independent study.  (See [par. 3.08](#308) below.)

(1)  Courses must be accredited by a nationally recognized accrediting agency.  Candidate status is not sufficient.  [If the courses are not accredited, the schools offering the courses must be accredited by one of the regional accrediting associations.]

(2)  Courses must have official, written, planned programs of activities approved by SAAs that are given to the students.  Schools do not have to publish the entire detailed plan of activities in their catalogs but the catalogs must identify the courses that have off-campus training.

(3)  The planned programs must describe training that is institutional in nature rather than OJT.  The plans must demonstrate that the students spend at least as much time in preparation and training as required for other resident courses.

(4)  There must be provisions for assigned instructors.  There must be at least one class session of 50 minutes per week.  Schools do not have to conduct the class sessions at the schools.  On job supervisors or trainers may act as adjunct faculty members on the school's behalf.  They do not have to be official members of the faculty.  The class sessions will not be informal, nonscheduled, or in non-classroom modes.  [A class session] will be a formal class meeting like those on campus and must be pre-scheduled on the same basis as classes for other resident courses.  Individual field meetings with unscheduled or unplanned subject matter are not class sessions.  Class sessions will be planned theoretical [periods of] instruction specified by schools and required for the courses.

(5)  Schools may or may not substitute the job training periods for degree requirements.  For example, a school may offer a degree in electrical engineering that a student pursues totally through regular class attendance.  Along with the resident program, the school may offer a cooperative program in electrical engineering.  The cooperative program may be the resident program courses plus alternate phases of job experience with electrical engineering firms.  The students are performing duties directly related to electrical engineering.  Although schools do not require the on-job portion for the resident program, it is supplemental to the training provided by the school.  Both resident and cooperative degrees may be approved, if all other approval criteria are met.

(6)  Schools must arrange with employers for placing individual students in those establishments.  This does not prohibit students from locating employers who are willing to participate in the courses.  However, the schools must approve the employment situation and exercise supervision and control over the student's activities at the establishments to an extent that the school ensures that training the student receives is relevant to the degree program.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**3.09  COOPERATIVE TRAINING**

---

**a.  General.** Cooperative training consists of full-time programs of education composed of phases of institutional training alternated with on-job training in businesses or industrial establishments.  Alternating periods may be a part of the day in school and a part of the day on job or may be such periods that alternate on a daily, weekly, monthly, or term basis.

**b.  Approval Criteria.**  To be approved by SAAs, the training must, at a minimum meet the following:

(1)  Courses are defined as cooperative courses in catalogs or other literature;

(2)  The institutional periods must be at least as long as the on-job training  periods  When determining whether or not the in school periods are at least as long as the job training periods, exclude any job training time that the school does not require;

(3)  Schools must grant appropriate credit for the on job portion of the courses; and

(4)  The on-job portions of the courses must be supplemental to the academic instruction and directly related to the training provided at the schools.

(5)  Schools may or may not substitute the job training periods for degree requirements.  For example, a school may offer a degree in electrical engineering that a student pursues totally through regular class attendance.  Along with the resident program, the school may offer a cooperative program in electrical engineering.  The cooperative program may be the resident program courses plus alternate phases of on-job experience with electrical engineering firms.  The students are performing duties directly related to electrical engineering.  Although schools do not require the on-job portion for the resident program, it is supplemental to the training provided by the school.  Both the resident program and the cooperative program may be approved, if all other approval criteria are met.

(6)  Schools must arrange with employers for placing individual students in those establishments.  This does not prohibit students from locating employers who are willing to participate in the courses.  However, the schools must approve the employment situation and exercise supervision and control over the student's activities at the establishments to an extent that the school ensures that training the student receives is relevant to the degree program.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**SUBCHAPTER II:  INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER LEARNING**

**3.10  REMEDIAL/DEFICIENCY COURSES**

---

**a.  General.**  SAAs may approve remedial study that addresses or otherwise corrects deficiencies in basic Mathematics, English, and Reading.  This includes:

(1)  Courses designed to improve English skills, including speaking, for students for whom English is a second language.

(2)  Courses designed to improve study skills as remedial courses if schools require students with a defined need to take them.

**b.  Approval Criteria.**

(1)  SAAs shall determine if the educational institution meet the requirments for remedial study per Title 38 CFR 21.4253(b).

**c. Certification**

      (1)  Schools may certify remedial study only for students for whom a verifiable need has been established.

*NOTE:  See Part 3, Chapter 7, Section 7.16 - 7.18,  for information concerning Refresher Training.*

[Back to Top](##Top)

**3.11  PRO RATA REFUND POLICY**

---

**a.  General.** Non-accredited schools must refund tuition and fees on a pro rata basis when VA students withdraw from courses or do not enroll after paying for courses, in whole or part.  The pro rata refund must, at a minimum, meet the following criteria:

(1)  The refund must be pro rated on a daily basis.

(2)  VA regulations allow a 10% deviation from the requirement that the amount of the refund be exactly pro rata.

(3)  VA regulations allow schools to retain up to $10.00 of any registration fee.

(4)  If schools have refund policies that are more favorable to the students, SAAs will require the schools to use those policies.

(5)  School or course catalogs must have description of the refund policies.  A simple statement that refunds are made on a pro rata basis is not sufficient.  The description must be clear enough for students to determine the amount of their refund.

(6)  Schools must make refunds promptly, i.e., within 40 days.

(7)  Schools must not require VA students to request the refunds.

(8)  Schools may apply the pro rata refund policy to VA students only.

**b.  Waiver Of The Pro Rata Refund Requirement.** Schools may apply through SAAs to RPO (Regional Processing Office) Directors for waivers of the requirements for pro rata refunds.  SAAs shall forward the applications to the ELR for review.  The ELR will forward the request to the RPO Directors along with their recommendations.

(1)  RPO Directors shall consider the recommendations and shall grant waivers only when they find that the schools:

(i)  Are colleges, universities, or similar schools offering post-secondary level academic instruction leading to standard college degrees.

(ii)  Are operated by agencies of states or units of local governments.

(iii)  If operated by agencies of a state, are located within the state.

(iv)  If operated by local governments units, are located within the boundaries of the unit’s taxing jurisdiction.

(v)  Are candidates for accreditation by regional accrediting agencies.

(vi)  Charges VA students no more than $120 per quarter, $180 per semester, or $360 per school year in tuition, fees, and other charges for the course.

(vii)  The waiver provisions apply to students rather than to courses.  For example, if a school charges in-state students $100 tuition and fees per quarter and out-of-state students $500 tuition and fees per quarter, any waiver granted applies to in-state students only.  Out-of-state students must still receive a pro rata refund of tuition, fees and other charges.

(2)  RPO Directors are authorized to make determinations approving or denying requests for waivers.

(i)  If the requirements for the waiver are met, letters will be sent to the schools advising of the approval.  Copies of the letters will be filed in the approval files.

(ii)  If the requirements for the waiver are not met, and the requests are denied, the denial letters to the schools will state the reasons for denial and advise the schools that they may request administrative reviews of the decisions by Director, Education Service within one year from the date on the denial letters.  Copies of denial letters will be filed in the approval files.  Request for administrative review should be made to the RPO Director who made the decision.

**c.  Appeals of Waiver Decisions.**  If requests for review are received, complete records, including the approval and compliance survey files, should be sent to the  Education Service Program Administration Staff (225B) for review and decision.  In reviewing the decision, the Director, Education Service will consider the evidence of record.  The Director, Education Service may not grant a waiver unless all the criteria of par. (b)(1) through (6) above are met.

(1)  RPO Directors will notify schools by letter when the records are forwarded to the Director, Education Service.

(2)  The decisions of the Director, Education Service will be sent to the RPO Directors to prepare written notices to the schools.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**3.12  PROGRAMS PURSUED IN MORE THAN ONE STATE**

---

When schools offer parts of courses in different states, the SAA in each state will approve the courses.  The SAA in each state will notify the ELR of the approval.  For example, the University of Pennsylvania offers the first three years of a degree in marine biology and the University of Florida offers the last two years.  The Pennsylvania and Florida SAAs will contact each other, determine if approval is appropriate, and notify the ELRs in Philadelphia and St. Petersburg of the joint approval or disapproval.  The  University of Pennsylvania certifies the part pursued in Pennsylvania and the University of Florida certifies the part pursued in Florida.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**3.13  INDIVIDUALIZED CURRICULUM**

---

Many IHLs allow students to design their own curriculums with the approval of their academic advisors.  These courses may be approved if they are degree courses or postdoctoral courses at IHLs.  The schools do not have to be accredited.  The schools and the students must plan the curriculums in advance and the schools must document the required subjects.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**3.14  PROGRAMS TO PREPARE FOR EXAMS**

---

SAAs may approve courses designed to prepare to take examinations required by federal, state, or local government to practice professional careers, such as certified public accountants and lawyers.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**3.15  VARIABLE CREDIT**

---

When the amount of credit granted may vary, schools must initially certify the minimum amount of credit that students can earn.  When the terms are over, the schools must certify the actual amount of credit the students earned if different from the amount originally certified.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**3.16  CREDIT BY EXAM AND LIFE EXPERIENCE**

---

Schools may not certify credit earned by taking competency tests or by evaluating of life experience unless class attendance (or independent study or practical training for accredited programs) is required.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**3.17  RESERVE OFFICER TRAINING CORPS**

---

Students in ROTC (Reserve Officer Training Corps) become commissioned officers upon completion of the ROTC program and their degrees.  Students enrolled in ROTC have the professional objective of commissioned officers.  The degree is one of the requirements for the objective.  Because the objective is a commission, not just the educational objective of a degree, VA students do not have to use ROTC courses as electives for their degrees.  Students may take ROTC courses along with the subjects required for their degrees, including electives.  The student may use ROTC courses as electives for degrees if the schools allow it.  SAAs do not have to approve dual objectives for these students.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**3.18  POST-DOCTORAL COURSES**

---

SAAs may approve postdoctoral certificate courses at accredited IHLs, if the schools issue diplomas, degrees, or certificates, and the courses meet the other approval requirements.  The fact that accredited IHLs issue certificates of completion indicates that the courses are bona fide educational objectives.  Postdoctoral courses (including medical courses not involving residencies, e.g., fellowships) for which schools do not issue certificates, will be reviewed very thoroughly by SAAs to determine if they lead to bona fide objectives.  The courses must be required to practice a profession or be necessary for employment, such as being required to meet licensing requirements.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**3.19  CLINICAL PASTORAL EDUCATION**

---

**a.  General.** The Commissioner of Education recognizes the Association for Clinical Pastoral Education as an accrediting agency.  The association accredits three Clinical Pastoral Education courses:  Basic, Advanced, and Supervisory.

**b.  Approval Issues**

(1)  The courses are considered institutional training as defined by [38 CFR 21.4265(e)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=385c07c911f69d9820b4799bc2be0199&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14265).  The Basic Clinical Pastoral Education is not a complete program of education.  SAAs may approve them, if they are prerequisites for enrollments in the Advanced or Supervisory courses.

(2)  SAAs may approve Advanced Clinical Pastoral Education courses for graduates of accredited theological seminaries who have experience as pastors and who have completed the Basic course.  Advanced Clinical Pastoral Education Courses are for members of the clergy who desire to function in areas such as parish ministries, institutional chaplaincies, pastoral counseling, and teaching ministries.

(3)  SAAs may approve Supervisory Clinical Pastoral Education courses for graduates of accredited theological schools who have experience as pastors (usually not less than three years).  The Basic and Advance courses are prerequisites.  Supervisory Clinical Pastoral Education courses are for members of the clergy who desire to become certified supervisors of clinical pastoral education.

(4)  Approvals of Clinical Pastoral Education programs must specifically show the courses the SAAs approved, i.e., Basic, Advanced, and Supervisory.  SAAs do not have to list unit subjects.  Since the courses are approved under [38 CFR 21.4265(e)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=385c07c911f69d9820b4799bc2be0199&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14265), the unit subjects do not have to be approved as independent study [(38 CFR 21.4267)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=79fcea46e759f141336e18ea2e931e9e&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14267) or practical training [(38 CFR 21.4265(f)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=385c07c911f69d9820b4799bc2be0199&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14265).  Approvals must specifically show the course lengths and the required attendance per week.

(5)  VCEs will use type of training "A" or "B" and type of hours "R" or "7" on awards for Clinical Pastoral Education courses.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**3.20  INDEPENDENT STUDY (See RPO Letter 22-05-01)**

---

**a.  General.**  VA students may receive education benefits for pursuit of independent study courses or for courses combining independent study with resident training.  Before October 9, 1996,  VA students could not receive education benefits for pursuit of courses offered through open circuit television unless they were enrolled concurrently in resident training.  [Public Law 104-275](https://www.congress.gov/104/plaws/publ275/PLAW-104publ275.pdf) requires VA to treat open circuit television courses the same way VA treats independent study courses.

**b.  Scope of Independent Study.** Cooperative courses are not considered to be independent study courses.  SAAs may approve correspondence courses as independent study, if they meet the approval requirements.

**c.  Definition of Independent Study.**  VA considers courses to be independent study courses when:

(1)  They lead to standard college degrees;

(2)  They consist of prescribed programs of study with provisions for interaction between students and regularly employed faculty members of the schools.  The interaction may be personally or through the use of communications technology, including mail, telephone, video conferencing, computer technology (including electronic mail), and other electronic means;

(3)  They are offered without any regularly scheduled, conventional classroom or laboratory sessions; and

(4)  They are not resident training.

**d.  Audio and Video Tapes.**  Courses conducted with audio or video tapes with no interaction between students and instructors are [not] independent study.  They are [not] independent study even if schools require students to use the tapes at specific places and times.  The assignment of proctors to supervise the use of the tapes does not satisfy the requirement for interaction between students and instructors because instructors are not available to answer questions concerning the educational materials.

**e.  Open Circuit Television.**  Courses that are conducted by open circuit television are independent study.

[Back to Top](##Top)

 

**SUBCHAPTER III.  NON-COLLEGE DEGREE INSTITUTIONS**

**3.21  LENGTH OF COURSE**

---

**a.  General.** [Title 38, U.S.C. 3676(c)(1)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3676 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3676)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) requires that SAAs find that courses, curriculums, and instruction are consistent in quality, content, and length with similar courses at other schools in the state.  This section of the law does not require that all similar courses be exactly the same length.  SAAs will establish general standards based on the average length of all similar courses.  SAAs will  determine whether courses that deviate from their standards are too long.

**b.  Length of Training Beyond Licensing Requirement.**  Generally, VA will not pay benefits for more training than required for educational, professional, or vocational objectives.  When schools offer more hours of training than required by licensing bodies, SAAs may approve entire courses, if they determine that the training is appropriate.  For example, a state requires 1,500 hours of training for cosmetologists.  A school offers 2,000 hours of training.  If the additional training is related to cosmetology and enhances the students' skills, the SAA may approve the entire course.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**3.22  STANDARDS OF ATTENDANCE**

---

**a.  General.** Non-accredited NCDs must have attendance standards that clearly state the maximum number of absences, both excused and unexcused, students are allowed and still remain enrolled in the courses.  This includes non-accredited degree courses that VA measures on a clock hour basis.  Schools must maintain adequate records that document when they must terminate students due to excessive absences.

**b.  Reporting.** [Public Law 101-237](https://www.congress.gov/bill/101st-congress/house-bill/901) eliminated the requirement that NCDs report absences for VA students effective December 18, 1989.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**3.23  FARM COOPERATIVE**

---

**a.  General.**  Farm cooperative courses are agricultural courses offered by schools.  They provide institutional training on a reduced basis to VA students engaged in farming.  To be approved, farm cooperative courses must limit their enrollments to VA students engaged concurrently in agricultural employment averaging at least 40 hours per week.  Schools may vary the number of hours of instruction offered each week due to seasonal considerations.  The agricultural employment of VA students must be relevant to cooperative courses.  This employment cannot primarily involve the processing, distribution or sale of agricultural commodities.

**b.  Class Schedules**

(1)  The institutional portion of farm cooperative courses:

(i.)  May be on a term, quarter, or semester basis; and

(ii.)  May consist of courses which:

(A.)  Are offered during at least 44 weeks of the year; and

(B.)  Require a minimum of five clock hours per week.

(2)  The time involved in field trips and individual and group instruction, sponsored and conducted by schools offering farm cooperative courses may be counted toward meeting the institutional clock hour requirements.

**c.  Application for Approval.**  Along with the application requirements defined in paragraphs 2.03 and 2.04, schools seeking approval of farm cooperative courses must submit statements of fact showing the following:

(1)  The courses are fully described or otherwise defined in the school’s catalogs or other literature.

(2)  The agricultural courses are offered concurrently with agricultural employment.

(3)  The schools verify on a continuing basis that students are engaged for an average of at least 40 hours per week in suitable agricultural employment that is relevant to the institutional agricultural courses offered by the schools and covers subject matter which is consistent with their institutional training program.

**d.  Suitable Agricultural Employment.** VA does not consider employment in businesses engaged primarily in the processing, distribution or sale of agricultural products or combinations thereof to be suitable agricultural employment.

(1)  Examples of this type of unacceptable employment include: dairy processing plants, grain elevators, packing plants, hatcheries, stockyards, or florist shops.  This is not an all inclusive list.

(2)  For the purposes of this paragraph, suitable agricultural employment is employment on farms or other agricultural establishments where the activities are either:

(i.)  The cultivation of the ground such as raising and harvesting of crops including fruits, vegetables, and pastures.

(ii.)  The feeding, breeding, and managing of livestock, including poultry and other specialized farming.

[Back to Top](##Top)