# Chapter 33 Sub-Chapter 4.5 - Additional Benefits

**Chapter 33 Sub-Chapter 4.5 - Additional Benefits**

This section will cover the following information about additional funding available for education benefits offered as part of the Chapter 33 program:  
   
[5.01 Yellow Ribbon Program](#501)  
   
[5.02 Chapter 30 and Chapter 1606 Kickers](#502)  
   
[5.03 Chapter 33 Kickers](#503)

   
**5.01 Yellow Ribbon Program**

---

**a. General.** The Post-9/11 GI Bill pays in-state tuition and fees for approved programs at public institutions of higher learning (IHLs), or up to an annual academic year maximum for private IHLs. Consequently, the tuition and fees charged may exceed the tuition and fee amounts normally payable under chapter 33.  
   
**b. Yellow Ribbon.** The Yellow Ribbon Program is a matching program that assists beneficiaries whose net charges exceed the amount of tuition and fee benefits payable.  IHLs may enter into a voluntary agreement (with VA) to pay for up to one-half of the unpaid net tuition and fee charges. VA will match the amount paid by the institution, up to half of the unpaid tuition and fee charges.  
   
**c. Eligibility for the Yellow Ribbon Program.**  Veterans, spouses of Veterans, and children using transferred entitlement (regardless of the transferor’s duty status), who are eligible at the 100% benefit level can be eligible for the Yellow Ribbon Program. Effective and payable August 1, 2018, Yellow Ribbon benefits were extended to Fry Scholarship beneficiaries and Purple Heart recipients.  Active duty members and their spouses using transferred entitlement are not eligible for this program.  
  
In order to participate in the Yellow Ribbon Program, IHLs are required to submit a Yellow Ribbon Program agreement ([VA Form 22-0839](https://www.vba.va.gov/pubs/forms/VBA-22-0839-ARE.pdf), Yellow Ribbon Program Agreement) to VA. The school will determine the maximum number of students which can participate in the program, as well as the maximum contribution amount per student per academic year. VA approves agreements for participation in the Yellow Ribbon Program, and the Yellow Ribbon Program information is stored in the Web Enabled Approval Management System (WEAMS).

**d. Verifying Eligibility for Yellow Ribbon.** Veterans Claims Examiners (VCEs) must verify if an educational institution is approved for the Yellow Ribbon Program in WEAMS. If approved in WEAMS, the claim should be processed for Yellow Ribbon Program payments.

If WEAMS indicates YR is not payable, the VCE should capture evidence into TIMS and ensure any YR amount has been removed from LTS fields.  The YR Denial Letter (Refer to [Part 4: Chapter 1.14](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073421/Part%204:%20Chapter%201%20-%20Enrollment%20Certification#114)) must be sent to the beneficiary with a copy to the institution.

VCEs should not verify Yellow Ribbon Program participation via the GI Bill website. Additionally, the maximum number of participants and maximum dollar contribution do not need to be verified while processing a claim for education benefits. The maximum participant number and dollar amounts will be reviewed and verified during the compliance survey activity.  
 

***Sources:***  
  
*Electronic Code of Federal Regulations*[***§ 21.9700. Yellow Ribbon Program***](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=ee9c16e5e75a6ecf23469e8bf4e5fa13&mc=true&node=pt38.2.21&rgn=div5#se38.2.21_19700)

[Go To Top](#top)

**5.02 Chapter 30 and Chapter 1606 Kickers**

---

**a. Relinquishing Benefit with Kicker**   
  
Individuals who relinquish the Montgomery GI Bill (Chapter 30) or the Montgomery GI Bill-Selected Reserve (Chapter 1606) benefit to establish eligibility for the Post-9/11 GI Bill and were eligible for a kicker (or supplemental educational assistance) under the relinquished program can be paid kicker benefits under Chapter 33. Payment amounts are calculated as follows:

For training prior to August 1, 2011,  
  
•  Eligible individuals receive payments for a Chapter 30 or Chapter 1606 kicker in a lump sum for the entire quarter, semester, or term, as applicable,  
  
•  Kickers are paid based on the monthly amount to which the individual was entitled at the time of the election of Chapter 33 (see NOTE below),  
  
•  The amount is prorated by the **rate of pursuit** for less than full time training.

   
For training September 30, 2011,  
  
•  Eligible individuals receive payments for a Chapter 30 or Chapter 1606 kicker on a monthly, rather than a lump sum, basis. [Note: Eligibility for the monthly housing allowance isn’t required],   
  
•  Kickers are paid based on the monthly amount to which the individual was entitled at the time of the election of Chapter 33 (see NOTE below),  
  
•  The amount is prorated by the rate of pursuit rounded to the nearest multiple of 10 for less than full time training.

**NOTE:**  Individuals relinquishing Chapter 1606 for Chapter 33 shall be paid their 1606 kicker in the same manner payable as if using Chapter 1606. The amount payable may be suspended, increase, decrease or be terminated by DoD. A Chapter 1606 kicker is no longer payable after separation from the Selected Reserves. VCEs must review the Veterans Information System (VIS) for changes in eligibility and develop with the service component only when information reported to VA is conflicting. (e.g. Military Status indicates “Separated” or the RCC code on the Military History page is “RE” indicating IRR service but 1606 eligibility has not been terminated or suspended.)

***Sources:  
  
**Part 12, Chapter 33. Chapter 12 - Public Laws and Regulations**,*** *Training Slides PL111-377, Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act of 2010, Title I, Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance, Section 109. Continuation of entitlement to additional educational assistance for critical skills or specialty.  
  
Electronic [USC Title 38 §3316. Supplemental educational assistance: members with critical skills or specialty; members serving additional service](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3316 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3316)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true)*

   
[Go To Top](#top)

**5.03 Chapter 33 Kickers**

---

**a. Background**   
  
Public Law 110-252, which created the Post-9/11 GI Bill, allows the secretaries of the various service components to offer kickers (or supplemental educational assistance) under Chapter 33.  
   
*Note: No kickers or supplemental educational assistance benefits have been offered under Chapter 33 as of the date that this content was published.*

**b. Payments**   
  
Payment amounts will be calculated as follows:  
  
•  Eligible individuals receive payments as an increase to the monthly housing allowance,  
  
•  The individual must be eligible for the monthly housing allowance in order to receive benefits,  
  
•  The amount is prorated by the rate of pursuit rounded to the nearest multiple of 10 for less than full time training

***Sources:***  
  
*[Electronic United States Code Title 38 §3316. Supplemental educational assistance: members with critical skills or specialty; members serving additional service.](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3316 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3316)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true)*

Last updated: October 6, 2015

[Go To Top](#top)

---