# CHAPTER 6. WORK FLOW MANAGEMENT

M22-3  
Change 6  
April 24, 1998

**CHAPTER 6. WORK FLOW MANAGEMENT**

**SUBCHAPTER I.  WORK-IN-PROGRESS SUBSYSTEM**

 

[6.01  General](#1)

[6.02  Accessing the WIPP Subsystem](#2)

[6.03  Status Selection Menu - W00 Screen](#3)

[6.04  WIPP Status - W10 Screen](#4)

[6.05  Timeliness - W20 Screen](#5)

[6.06  Folder Delay Status - W30 Screen](#6)

[6.07  Miscellaneous WIPP Status - W40 Screen](#7)

[6.08  Maturing Pending Issues - W50 Screen](#8)

[6.09  Maturing Diary Issues - W60 Screen](#9)

[6.10  Appeal Cases](#10) 

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**FIGURE**

 

[6.1  Status Selection Menu - W00 Screen Layout](#f1)

[6.2  Work in Process Status - W10 Screen Layout](#f2)

[6.3  Current Month Timeliness Status By Count - W20 Screen Layout](#f3)

[6.4  Previous Month Timeliness Status By Percent - W20 Screen Layout](#f4)

[6.5  Folder Delay Status - W30 Screen Layout](#f5)

[6.6  Miscellaneous Work in Process Status - W40 Screen Layout](#f6)

[6.7  Maturing Pending Issues - W50 Screen Layout](#f7)

[6.8  Maturing Diary Issues - W60 Screen Layout](#f8)

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**SUBCHAPTER II.  MANAGEMENT APPLICATION**

   
[6.11  General](#11)

[6.12  WIPP User Plan](#12)

[6.13  Work Flow Plan](#13)

[6.14  Management Analysis](#14)

[6.15  Retention of Data](#15)

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**CHAPTER 6. WORK FLOW MANAGEMENT**

**SUBCHAPTER I. WORK-IN-PROGRESS SUBSYSTEM**

**6.01  GENERAL**

 

This chapter deals with the use of the WIPP (Work-in-Progress) Subsystem in managing education programs only. A complete description of this subsystem, including the appeals tracking system, is found in M21-4, Chapter 6.

**a.** The WIPP Subsystem is designed to assist management in identifying areas which require attention and analysis. Its effectiveness is highly dependent upon the quality of information entered. Issues which cannot be promptly completed must be placed under BDN (Benefits Delivery Network) control as quickly and accurately as possible. The WIPP Subsystem is an effective tool, and management is responsible for assuring that it is being used. All personnel issued the WIPP command should become familiar with the subsystem both by using the LERN command for CAI (Computer Assisted Instruction) and by on-the-job usage. 

**b.** The WIPP Subsystem provides information from the pending issue file on all cases in a pending status, as well as information concerning processing timeliness by end product for current and previous calendar month. Pending issues remain in WIPP until they have been accepted (by authorization of an award or disallowance), cleared, or canceled. The data on WIPP screens is current as of close of business on the previous workday.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**6.02  ACCESSING THE WIPP SUBSYSTEM**

**a.** Enter the command WIPP and your password on the Ready screen to display the Status Selection Menu screen, W00. Operators at field stations can enter any valid screen number on the Ready screen to bypass the W00 screen and display the requested screen. (Operators in VA Central Office must enter the last two digits of the number of the station they wish to review on the W00 screen.) Then make entries to view the information desired.

**b.** The entry fields common to all of the WIPP screens are EPC (End Product Code), EPC TYPE, TERMINAL DIGIT RANGE and NEXT SCREEN.  Once an entry is made in a field other than NEXT SCREEN, it remains on all screens until the transaction ends, unless it is deleted or changed by the operator.

1. END PRODUCT CODE. You can enter up to five EPCs if they are the same end product type. If specific EPCs are entered, you cannot make an entry in the EPC TYPE field.

2. END PRODUCT CODE TYPE. EDU (all education benefit programs except chapter 30) and C30 (chapter 30) are used by the education authorization activity; LIA (liaison) and COM (compliance survey) are used by the ESU (Education Services Unit). Enter EPC TYPE only if you wish to review all end products of a specific type. Because a single screen carries a maximum of 11 EPCs, entry of EDU or C30 in this field will require two W10, W20, W50, or W60 screens to display all EPCs of this type. After the first screen is displayed, press ALT+ENTER to display the second screen.

*NOTE: The GL key which is found on Wang keyboards is equivalent to ALT+ENTER.*

3. TERMINAL DIGIT RANGE. For authorization end products, you can review any breakdown of consecutive terminal digits. To review a single digit, enter it before and after THRU; to review all work in the station, enter digits 00 THRU 99. The terminal digit range you select depends on your responsibility under the WIPP User Plan. (See [Section 6.12](#12).)  For ESU end products, the numbers to enter represent two-digit state codes. Since most ESUs have only one state in their jurisdiction, entry of the code for that state in both fields will generally show all the pending issues. However, if an ESU has more than one state in its jurisdiction or is doing work for another station (for example, a compliance survey), the TERMINAL DIGIT RANGE must include all the state codes involved. Entry of digits 00 THRU 99 is therefore recommended whenever reviewing ESU pending issues. 

4. NEXT SCREEN. Enter the next screen to be reviewed. To terminate WIPP processing, you normally enter END in NEXT SCREEN. (An exception occurs when you request a detail print. See [Paragraph c(2)](#2c2) below.)

**c.** Certain screens have the additional entry fields COLUMN and DETAIL, which are used to request detailed printed listings of pending issues.

1. COLUMN. The W10, W50, and W60 screens have this field, by which you select issues pending within a specific time period to print for review. Enter the alpha character which appears over the column displaying the time period of interest. (For instructions on using the individual screens, see Sections [6.04](#4), [6.05](#5), [6.06](#6), [6.07](#7), [6.08](#8), and [6.09](#9) below.)

2. DETAIL. To obtain printed listings of individual pending issues from the W10, W30, W40, W50, and W60 screens, enter X or Y in this field. The W10, W50, and W60 screens require an entry in COLUMN as well as in DETAIL. On the W40 screen, there are three DETAIL fields, used to select REJECTED TRANSACTIONS OVER 10 DAYS, PENDING AUTHORIZATION OVER 5 DAYS, or CASES IN RATING BOARD OVER 7 DAYS. You can make one to three entries on the same screen. Printed output is produced when you press the enter key. The listings are double-spaced to allow for annotation during review. If no cases fall within the parameters entered for the print, the message "No Records Available-Please Resubmit" appears on the screen. If the list is over 100, a message will appear asking for different parameters. You must redefine the  parameters (e.g., reduce the number of terminal digits) to limit prints to 100 cases or fewer. When you request a detail print and also want to review another WIPP screen or the same screen, enter that screen number in NEXT SCREEN before pressing ALT+ENTER (or GL). Otherwise, WIPP processing will terminate and the Ready screen will be displayed.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**Figure 6.1.  Status Selection Menu - W00 Screen Layout**

W00                                                           STATUS SELECTION MENU                                                         MM-DD-YY

                                                                        REGIONAL OFFICE XX

 

VALID ENTRIES FOR NEXT SCREEN                                        VALID ENTRIES FOR EPC TYPE

 

                W10  -  WORK IN PROGRESS                                         COMPENSATION & PENSION                                  C&P

                W20  -  TIMELINESS                                                        EDUCATION (OTHER THAN CH 30)                          EDU

                W30  -  FOLDER DELAY STATUS                                VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION                                VRC

                W40  -  MISCELLANEOUS STATUS                             LIAISON ACTIONS                                                        LIA

                W50  -  MATURING PENDING ISSUES                        COMPLIANCE SURVEYS                                            COM

                W60  -  MATURING DIARY ISSUES                             CHAPTER 30                                                                   C30

 

                                                                APPEALS RECORD MANAGEMENT

 

                W70  -  PENDING APPEAL ISSUES                               VETERANS APPEALS                                              VAR

                W80  -  COMPLETED APPEAL ISSUES

 

                TIMELINESS REPORT ONLY - PREVIOUS MONTH   X                         BY PERCENT   X

 

END PRODUCT CODE                                      EPC TYPE                                     TERMINAL DIGIT RANGE

XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX                                XXX                                                XX   THRU   XX

                                                                                                                                                                                NEXT SCREEN  XXX

 

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**6.03  STATUS SELECTION MENU - W00 SCREEN**

**a.** The valid entries for NEXT SCREEN and EPC TYPE are listed on the W00 screen. See [Figure 6.1](#f1) for a representation of the W00 screen layout.  You may also enter the EPC or EPC TYPE and TERMINAL DIGIT RANGE, as well as NEXT SCREEN parameters. When requesting the W20 Timeliness screen (See [Section 6.05](#5)), you may select PREVIOUS MONTH and/or PERCENT format from this screen, rather than waiting until the W20 screen is displayed.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**Figure 6.2. Work in Process Status - W10 Screen Layout**

W10                                                      WORK IN PROCESS STATUS                                           MM-DD-YY

                                                               XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX

                                                                                    (A)        (B)        (C)        (D)            (E)         (F)             (G)

                               AVERAGE    AVERAGE                                                                                                  OVER

           DIVISION    CONTROL       DAYS            00-14    15-30    31-60    61-90    91-180  181-360        360

EPC      TOTAL        DAYS        PENDING         DAYS   DAYS   DAYS   DAYS   DAYS    DAYS            DAYS

XXX        XXXXX           XX           XXX             XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX    XXXX    XXXX               XXXX

XXX        XXXXX           XX           XXX             XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX    XXXX    XXXX               XXXX

XXX        XXXXX           XX           XXX             XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX    XXXX    XXXX               XXXX

TOTAL   XXXXX                           XXXX            XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX    XXXX    XXXX               XXXX

END PRODUCT CODE         EPC TYPE          TERMINAL DIGIT RANGE        COLUMN           DETAIL

    XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX       XXX                       XX   THRU   XX                      X                     X

                                                                                                                                    NEXT SCREEN  XXX

[Go To Top](#top)

---

 

**6.04  WIPP STATUS - W10 SCREEN**

 

The W10 screen provides a comprehensive view of the total workload that has been placed under BDN control. See [Figure 6.2](#f2) for a representation of the W10 screen layout.

**a.** The W10 screen displays a count of all cases with pending issue files, except future diaries, from the time they are placed under control until awards or disallowances under them are accepted by the BDN or completed using the commands PCLR (Pending issue CLeaR) or PCAN (Pending issue CANcel) for authorization issues, or WCLR Work CLeaR) or WCAN (Work CANcel) for education services issues. Counts are displayed and detail prints are available for the specific EPCs or EPC TYPE entered in the corresponding fields. The DIVISION TOTAL column indicates the total number of cases under BDN control for each EPC that is listed. The AVERAGE CONTROL DAYS and AVERAGE DAYS PENDING columns also show the respective data by end product. The columns labeled (A) through (G) show the number of cases which have been pending for the number of days indicated.

**b.** For each pending issue, the W-10 detail prints show file number, payee, EPC, benefit, folder location and date, suspense date, and total number of days pending. To obtain a detail print, see [Section 6.02(c)](#2c).

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**6.05  TIMELINESS - W20 SCREEN**

The W20 screen is a tool for viewing trends in claims processing timelines and making comparisons of work units. See [Figure 6.3](#f3) and [Figure 6.4](#f4) for representations of the W20 screen layout.

**a.** The W20 screen displays data concerning issues where final disposition by the commands PCLR, WCLR, or CAUT (Claims AUThorization) has been made within the current or previous month. You have the option of viewing the data as counts or as percentages of cases completed within the indicated time frames for the EPCs selected. In addition, you can request the data for the PREVIOUS MONTH or for the CURRENT MONTH to date. On the first of the month the CURRENT MONTH screen shows zeros.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**Figure 6.3.  Current Month Timeliness Status By Count - W20 Screen Layout**

W20                              CURRENT MONTH TIMELINESS STATUS BY COUNT  \*                 MM-DD-YY

XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX

 

                          (A)        (B)        (C)         (D)           (E)                                      AVERAGE DAYS    AVER

                        01-30    31-60    61-90    91-180  OVER 180     TOTAL       TO COMPLETE       CONTROL

EPC                 DAYS   DAYS   DAYS   DAYS      DAYS           CASES                RO   RDPC        TIME

XXX                 XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX       XXXX            XXXXX               XXX   XXX            XX

XXX                 XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX       XXXX            XXXXX               XXX   XXX            XX

XXX                 XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX       XXXX            XXXXX               XXX   XXX            XX

TOTAL                                                                                             XXXXX

    END PRODUCT CODE          EPC TYPE                    TERMINAL DIGIT RANGE                      COLUMN

   XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX             XXX                                XX   THRU   XX                                     X

PREVIOUS MONTH   X              BY PERCENT   X                                                          NEXT SCREEN  XXX

 

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**Figure 6.4.  Previous Month Timeliness Status By Percent - W20 Screen Layout**

W20                              PREVIOUS MONTH TIMELINESS STATUS BY PERCENT  \*                       MM-DD-YY

                                                            XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX

 

                          (A)        (B)        (C)         (D)           (E)                                      AVERAGE DAYS      AVER

                        01-30    31-60    61-90    91-180  OVER 180     TOTAL           TO COMPLETE  CONTROL

EPC                 DAYS   DAYS   DAYS   DAYS      DAYS           CASES            RO   RDPC           TIME

XXX                 XX.X   XX.X   XX.X   XX.X        XX.X             XXXXX               XXX   XXX               XX

XXX                 XX.X   XX.X   XX.X   XX.X        XX.X             XXXXX               XXX   XXX               XX

XXX                 XX.X   XX.X   XX.X   XX.X        XX.X             XXXXX               XXX   XXX               XX

 

TOTAL                                                                                        XXXXX

    END PRODUCT CODE          EPC TYPE                    TERMINAL DIGIT RANGE                      COLUMN

   XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX                    XXX                                XX   THRU   XX                                     X

PREVIOUS MONTH   X              BY PERCENT   X                                                          NEXT SCREEN  XXX

 

*\*NOTE:  The W20 Screen title will be one of the following, depending on the nature of data requested:*

 

      CURRENT MONTH TIMELINESS STATUS BY COUNT

      CURRENT MONTH TIMELINESS STATUS BY PERCENT

      PREVIOUS MONTH TIMELINESS STATUS BY COUNT

      PREVIOUS MONTH TIMELINESS STATUS BY PERCENT

[Go To Top](#top)

---

 

**b. AVERAGE DAYS TO COMPLETE** shows the average number of days that were required to finish processing the EPCs, that is, the disposition date minus the date of claim plus one. If action is completed on an issue that was established as a "future diary" control, the date of claim used for computation is the date the diary matured. Figures in the RO (Regional Office) column are based on the regional office and terminal digits selected. Figures in the RDPC (Regional Data Processing Center) column are based on all digits for the selected EPCs processed by the regional data processing center servicing the selected regional office. A trend of excessive completion time for any end product is an indicator of potential work flow or timeliness problems and should receive management attention.

**c.  AVER CONTROL TIME** shows the average number of days that were required to place the EPCs under BDN control, that is, the dates pending issues were established minus the dates of claim. A trend of excessive control time for any end product is an indicator of potential work flow or timeliness problems and should receive management attention.

 

**d.  Detail listings are not available from this screen.**

[Go To Top](#top)

---

 

**Figure 6.5.  Folder Delay Status - W30 Screen Layout**

W30                                                        FOLDER DELAY STATUS                                              MM-DD-YY

                                                            XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX

   
                                                FOLDER STATUS                                             TOTAL 

                                                TRANSFERRED-IN                                               XX

                                                IN PREPARATION                                                 XX

                                                PULLED                                                                  XX

                                                OTHER DELAYS                                                   XX

 

    END PRODUCT CODE                      EPC TYPE                    TERMINAL DIGIT RANGE          DETAIL

   XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX                    XXX                                     XX   THRU   XX                      X

                                                                                                                                    NEXT SCREEN   XXX

 

[Go To Top](#top)

---

 

**6.06  FOLDER DELAY STATUS - W30 SCREEN**

 

The Folder Delay Status screen is designed to monitor problems in transferring, establishing and pulling folders. See [Figure 6.5](#f5) for a representation of the W30 screen layout. This screen shows only authorization issues, not ESU issues. The screen shows the number of cases for the digits and EPCs selected in each of four status categories: TRANSFERRED-IN, IN PREPARATION, PULLED, and OTHER DELAYS. 

**a.** The information for the W30 screen is obtained from the pending issue file and is dependent on entries on the S99 (Disposition) screen. Whenever a folder is associated with a claim, the next transaction should have an entry on the S99 screen showing the folder is with the claim. This screen can be accessed under the commands DISP (claims DISPosition), CADJ (Claims ADJudication), CDAT (Claims DATa entry), or CDEV (Claims DEVelopment). If the S99 screen is properly used, then problems in the correspondence or files activity can be monitored without manually reviewing the activity. See M22-4, Part II, Paragraph 6.04g for instructions on the use of the S99 screen.

**b.** For each pending issue, the W30 detail prints show file number, payee, EPC, benefit, folder location, stub name, establishment date for the pending issue, request date, and source from which requested: TRANS (folder transfer), PREP (folder preparation), FILES, or OTHER). The listings are in terminal digit order, and are cannot be separated by status category. To obtain a detail print, see [Paragraph 6.02(c)](#2c).

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**6.07  MISCELLANEOUS WIPP STATUS - W40 SCREEN**

This screen shows the total number (TOTAL CASES) that have been delayed, and the average number of days delayed in processing (AVERAGE DAYS), in each of four categories showing why or where the delay occurred. This screen shows only authorization issues, not ESU issues. The average delay days information is displayed for either the EPC TYPE or one specific EPC selected by the operator. See [Figure 6.6](#f6) for a representation of the W40 screen layout.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**Figure 6.6  Miscellaneous Work in Process Status - W40 Screen Layout**

W40                                          MISCELLANEOUS WORK IN PROCESS STATUS                          MM-DD-YY

                                                            XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX

                                                                                                             TOTAL             AVERAGE

DETAIL                                                                                                 CASES                  DAYS

 

   X       REJECTED TRANSACTIONS OVER 10 DAYS                 XXX                   XX

   X       PENDING AUTHORIZATION OVER 5 DAYS                      XXX                   XX

   X       CASES IN RATING BOARD OVER 7 DAYS                      XXX                   XX

   X       PENDING ACCEPTANCE OVER 5 DAYS                        XXX                   XX

   X       NUMBER OF REJECTS                                                       XXX                   XX

 

    END PRODUCT CODE                       EPC TYPE                    TERMINAL DIGIT RANGE

   XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX                    XXX                                            XX   THRU   XX    

                                                                                                                                    NEXT SCREEN  XXX

[Go To Top](#top)

---

 

**a. REJECTED TRANSACTIONS OVER 10 DAYS.** The number of cases with uncorrected rejects which have prevented processing.

**b.  PENDING AUTHORIZATION OVER 5 DAYS.** The cases where all work action has been completed except for the decision to approve or disapprove the action by the authorizer. Supervisors should monitor these cases closely to insure that the number is kept to a minimum.

 

**c.  PENDING ACCEPTANCE OVER 5 DAYS.** A category not based on activities within the regional office. Cases are identified in this category because of overlaps in processing cycles or delays in posting completed transaction at the RDPC.

**d. NUMBER OF REJECTS.** The number of outstanding rejects is available for all education EPC Types (EDU, C30).

**e.** For each pending issue, the W-40 detail prints show file number, payee, EPC, benefit, folder location and date, suspense date, and days in the status category. To obtain a detail print, see [Paragraph 6.02(c)](#2c).

[Go To Top](#top)

---

 

**6.08  MATURING PENDING ISSUES - W50 SCREEN**

 

There are two purposes for the Maturing Pending Issues screen. Column A identifies issues on which action is due, to manage the workload and assure timely processing of claims. Columns B through G identify issues on which action is past due, to identify problem areas and help resolve out-of-line situations in particular end products. The time categories for issues on the W50 screen are based on the suspense date, not the date of claim. This suspense date is automatically generated during CEST (Claims ESTablishment) and CADJ processing to establish a new pending issue, or when a future diary issue matures. For education end products, the automatic suspense date is 30 days in the future. However, for authorization issues, the generated date may be modified by the manual entry of a desired suspense date on the claims establishment screen during CEST, CADJ, or PCHG (Pending issues CHanGe) processing, or on the S99 screen when accessed by the CDEV, CDAT, or CADJ commands. For ESU issues, this can only be done by canceling the issue using WCAN, and re-establishing it using WEST (Work ESTablishment) with the new date. See [Figure 6.7](#f7) for a representation of the W50 screen layout.

**Figure 6.7.  Maturing Pending Issues - W50 Screen Layout**

W50                                              MATURING PENDING ISSUES                                                  MM-DD-YY

                                                     XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX

                          (A)                    (B)              (C)              (D)               (E)               (F)                   (G)

            MATURING ISSUES                                          PENDING ISSUES PAST DUE

                        00-07                01-30          31-60          61-90          91-180        181-365 OVER

EPC                 DAYS               DAYS         DAYS         DAYS         DAYS          DAYS             1 YEAR

XXX                 XXXX              XXXX        XXXX        XXXX          XXXX          XXXX               XXXX

XXX                 XXXX              XXXX        XXXX        XXXX          XXXX          XXXX               XXXX

XXX                 XXXX              XXXX        XXXX        XXXX          XXXX          XXXX               XXXX

 

TOTAL              XXXX              XXXX        XXXX        XXXX          XXXX          XXXX               XXXX

 

   END PRODUCT CODE           EPC TYPE                    TERMINAL DIGIT RANGE          COLUMN     DETAIL

    XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX       XXX                                             XX   THRU   XX                       X               X

                                                                                                                                    NEXT SCREEN  XXX

 

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**a.** Column A displays pending issues which will reach their suspense date ("mature") within the next 7 days. For authorization, these include pending issues established with a date of claim and a suspense date, as well as pending issues originally established as future diaries, but which have passed their diary suspense date and have become regular pending issues with a date of claim and a new suspense date. (See [Section 6.09](#9) below.) For ESU, these include pending issues established with a date of claim and a suspense date, and future diaries nearing their diary suspense date, since there is no W60 screen for ESU issues. Obtain a detail listing of cases from Column A weekly to assure timely processing of issues.

**b.** Columns B through G display issues which have already matured and fall in the time categories listed. The statistical information shown on the screen progresses from Column A to Column G as the individual issues mature and become past due. Supervisors should obtain detail listings from these columns at their discretion to identify and resolve problems with particular end products or organizational units.

 

**c.** For each pending issue, the W-50 detail prints show file number, payee, stub name, EPC, benefit, date of claim, suspense date, and folder location. To obtain a detail print, see [Paragraph 6.02(c)](#2c).

[Go To Top](#top)

---

 

**6.09  MATURING DIARY ISSUES - W60 SCREEN**

 

The Maturing Diary Issue screen W60 also has two purposes. Column A identifies diaries which are reaching their suspense date and will now require action. Columns B through F and the TOTAL ISSUES column display the number of issues that have been diaried in the BDN system for future action or establishment of an actual pending issue. This information enables management to plan in advance for this segment of the workload. This screen shows only authorization issues, not ESU issues. Pending ESU future diaries which are not yet approaching their suspense dates are accessible only by the WINQ (Work INQuiry) command. See [Section 6.08](#8) for maturing ESU future diaries. See [Figure 6.8](#f8) for a representation of the W60 screen layout.

**Figure 6.8.  Maturing Diary Issues - W60 Screen Layout**

W60                                                      MATURING DIARY ISSUES                                             MM-DD-YY

                                                            XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX

                                                     (A)              (B)                (C)               (D)              (E)                       (F)

                        TOTAL              00-07          08-30          31-90          91-180      181-365              OVER

EPC                 ISSUES            DAYS         DAYS         DAYS         DAYS         DAYS                1 YEAR

XXX                 XXXX              XXXX        XXXX        XXXX          XXXX          XXXX                 XXXX

XXX                 XXXX              XXXX        XXXX        XXXX          XXXX          XXXX                 XXXX

XXX                 XXXX              XXXX        XXXX        XXXX          XXXX          XXXX                 XXXX

TOTAL              XXXX              XXXX        XXXX        XXXX          XXXX          XXXX               XXXX

 

   END PRODUCT CODE           EPC TYPE                    TERMINAL DIGIT RANGE          COLUMN     DETAIL

    XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX       XXX                                     XX   THRU   XX                         X               X

                                                                                                                                    NEXT SCREEN  XXX

  

**a.** Column A displays future diaries which will reach their suspense date ("mature") within the next 7 days. Upon reaching the suspense date set during establishment, the future diary is converted to a regular pending issue, with the former diary date as date of claim; a new suspense date is set automatically. This issue will appear at the appropriate age on the W10 and W50 screens. See [Section 6.04](#4) and [Section](#8) [6.08](#8) above. Obtain a detail listing of cases from Column A weekly to assure timely processing of claims.

 

**b.** Columns B through F display future diaries which will reach their suspense date within the time categories listed. The statistical information shown on the screen progresses from Column F to Column A and is dropped from the system on the day after it is due. Supervisors should obtain detail listings from these columns at their discretion to identify and resolve problems with particular end products or organizational units.

 

**c.** For each future diary, the W-60 detail prints show file number, payee, stub name, EPC, benefit, suspense date, reason, and folder location. To obtain a detail print, see [Paragraph 6.02(c)](#2c).

 

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**6.10  APPEAL CASES**

 

See M21-4, paragraphs 6.10 and 6.11

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**SUBCHAPTER II.  MANAGEMENT APPLICATION**

 

**6.11  GENERAL**

 

**a.** The WIPP Subsystem provides statistical data regarding current pending claims (W10), past performance (W20, previous month and current month to date), future workload (W50 and W60), and status of appeals (W70 and W80); and it can indicate the existence of trouble spots (W30 and W40). Management should use this information for monitoring and improving both work flow and the timeliness of claims processing. By effectively monitoring the aggregate work in process and maturing issues data, and conscientiously reviewing individual pending issues, management can focus attention on specific problem areas.

 

**b.** Because the WIPP Subsystem uses substantial computer resources, supervisors should use it in a way which has least impact on other areas. Request only those detail listings which are required for processing (W50 and W60 Column A), or which are needed for review of specific areas and can be reviewed over a limited period of time. Do not request detail listings during peak processing times during the business week or day.

 

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**6.12  WIPP USER PLAN**

 

**a.** The education authorization activity must devise and keep current, based on changing circumstances, a WIPP user plan. This plan may be included in an overall adjudication division plan, or issued separately. This plan must be implemented to ensure effective work flow and maximum timeliness. It must be distributed to all individuals concerned in its implementation. A formal written WIPP user plan is not required for the Education Services Unit. However, similar procedures for review of pending issues should be used to assure both timely processing and the identification and resolution of problems.

 

**b.** The WIPP user plan should be in a memorandum format, and must include the following elements:

 

1. A weekly review of maturing issues (W50/W60, Column A) to assure that action is taken at the earliest possible point, with minimal management intervention.

 

2. Reviews of pending issues (W10 or W50) to assure that cases receive management attention at higher levels as their age increases. Since the W10 and W50 screens include the same pending issues, take care to avoid duplicate reviews. Determine the frequency of reviews based on education timeliness standards, current station education timeliness statistics, and goals for improvement. Take into consideration that average processing time for education end products is generally shorter than for compensation and pension end products.

 

3. Reviews of folder and miscellaneous delays (W30/W40) to expedite work flow.

 

4. Reviews of appeal cases as prescribed in M21-4, Paragraphs 6.13(j) and 6.13(k).

5. Specific responsibilities, by position, for completing reviews on all cases selected. This includes assignment of alternates to perform reviews during the absence of primary assigned reviewers, and specific directions on when to search for education folders.

 

6. Specific annotation requirements. When the review results in continuation of an end product, annotate a permanent document in the education folder with the pending end product, the letter "p" (pending), the date, and the reviewer's initials. Annotate WIPP listings with sufficient information to quickly identify cases not requiring folder review.

 

7. The data retention requirements in Paragraph 6.15.

**c.** Base the WIPP user plan on a systematic analysis of timeliness data covering at least 12 months. Use data from DOOR (Distribution of Operational Resources) reports 1004 and 1016 or previous months' W20 screens if they have been kept. Devise a realistic plan emphasizing the review of cases in end product categories that the data shows to have been problems. A realistic plan will not require review of very large numbers of cases, but will require review in areas where the greatest improvement can be expected. Review the plan at least annually and include it in the SOAR program.

**d.** Reviews must be thorough. However, emphasize taking action based on the reviews, rather than merely completing the reviews themselves.

 

**e.** Ensure that employees properly set and update suspense dates and folder/claim locations. (See [Section 6.08](#8) above; and Part II, paragraph 6.04g.)

 

**f.** Writing a good WIPP user plan is only the first step. Consistent and aggressive implementation of the plan is the key to effective work flow and maximum timeliness.

 

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**6.13  WORK FLOW PLAN**

 

A written work flow plan for the education authorization activity may be helpful in expediting claims processing, especially when used in conjunction with an effective WIPP user plan. A work flow plan is optional, and must be closely tailored to local circumstances. It should be brief, and may be in memorandum, outline, or flow chart form. It may cover all of the education claims processing activity, or one or more sub elements; separate plans may be used for sub elements. Work flow plans should be furnished to all individuals involved in the activity covered. Plans may include such procedures as the following.

**a.** Mail separation and routing

**b.** Claims and folder establishment

**c.** Transfer of folders

**d.** Folder pull

**e.** Drop filing

**f.** Contacts within the RO (e.g., finance, ESU) or out of the RO (e.g., schools, service departments, other ROs)

**g.** Check intercept

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**6.14  MANAGEMENT ANALYSIS**

**a.** Supervisors should do a monthly informal comparison of current data and prior data to analyze trends. Consider both monthly and 12-month cumulative data. Charts or graphs may be useful. Take the following action based on the results of that analysis.

1. Emphasize individual case reviews of end products which have been problems for a short time (1-2 months).

2. Study end products which have been persistent problems (over 3 months) to find causes and solutions.

**b.** Incorporate longer-term and more formal analysis in the Systematic Analyses of Operations program whenever appropriate.

**c.** Use the results of management analysis to update and improve the WIPP user plan, and the work flow plan(s), if used.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**6.15  RETENTION OF DATA**

**a.** To assure continuity of data, establish a system to determine when to obtain, print, and review data. Weekly detail listings of W50 and W60 Column A are required (see [Paragraph 6.08(c)](#8c) and [Paragraph 6.09(c)](#9c)). Generally, the first workday of the month is the most suitable for printing monthly data, since the previous month statistics on the W20 screen are available. Management may designate additional points during the month to obtain prints as required under the WIPP User Plan.

**b.** Prints of aggregate statistics should be obtained for the entire education authorization activity. Prints of statistics by organizational subdivision (e.g., section, unit, team) are also required to allow a comparison of data within the education authorization activity.

**c.** The retention requirements listed below apply only to the education authorization activity. Since there is nor requirement for a formal WIPP user plan for the ESU, there are no formal requirements for the retention of data.

1. Retain prints of the subdivision statistics of W20 screen, previous month, for a minimum of 12 consecutive months. (Maintenance of the same monthly data, broken down by organizational subdivision, as a record on a personal computer satisfies this requirement.) Do not retain aggregate W20 previous month prints since this data is contained in DOOR report 1004. Retain prints of work in process, W10, and maturing issues, W50, for a minimum of 12 consecutive months. Maintain and destroy W30, W40, and W60 prints in accordance with RCS VB-1, part I, item 13-052.4.  In addition, destroy W10, W20, and W50 prints in accordance with Records Control Schedule VB-1, part I, item 13‑052.4.

2. Retain prints of W10 and W50 screens and related detail listings, annotations, and notes of case reviews by the supervisors for a period of at least 6 consecutive months. Document any case over 180 days as to why final action could not have been taken.

[Go To Top](#top)

---