# **Sub-Chapter 4. Entitlement Issues**

Learn more about the following entitlement issues regarding Chapter 33:

[4.01 Multiple Sources of Entitlement](#401)

[4.02 Eligibility for Post-9/11 GI Bill and Another VA Education Benefit](#402)

[4.03 Eligibility of Post-9/11 GI Bill and Two or More Education Benefits](#403)

[4.04 Dual Entitlement: Dependents](#404)

[4.05 Dependents Also Eligible Based on Their Own Service](#405)

[4.06 Transfer of Entitlement Issues](#406)

[4.07 The 81-Month Rule](#407)

[4.08 48-Month Rule Based on Carr v. Wilkie Court Case](#4.08 48-Month Rule Based on Carr v. Wilkie Court Case)

## 4.01 Multiple Sources of Entitlement

---

**a. General**

An individual can be eligible for education benefits under two or more programs administered by VA (Veterans Affairs).  An individual cannot receive more than one education benefit concurrently.

\*In the case of an individual being eligible for the Post-9/11 GI Bill based on his or her own service and in receipt of Transfer of Entitlement (ToE) from a transferor, that individual may use entitlement from both sources concurrently.

**Scenario**

Tom served 6 years in the Air Force after September 11, 2001 and receives an honorable discharge. He is eligible for 36 months of VA education benefits under the Post-9/11 GI Bill. His wife Nicole is currently on active duty and transferred 18 months of benefits to Tom under ToE. Tom has filed a claim for the Post-9/11 GI Bill based on his own service and filed a claim to use his ToE benefits from his spouse.

Q: Which entitlement sources are available for Tom to use immediately to attend an Institute of Higher Learning?

A: In this scenario, Tom can use BOTH his wife’s benefits under ToE and the Post-9/11 GI Bill based on his own service. This is an example of using TWO sources of entitlement for the same claim with one source being the individual’s and the other source being from ToE.

[Back to Top](##Top)

#### 4.02 Eligibility for Post-9/11 GI Bill and Another VA Education Benefit

---

**a. Eligibility**

An individual who is eligible for benefits under both the Post-9/11 GI Bill and the Montgomery GI Bill, Montgomery GI Bill-Selected Reserve, or Reserve Education Assistance Program will need to make an election for which benefit they wish to receive. Elections are irrevocable (cannot be changed).

**b. Exhausting a benefit**

An individual who is currently receiving benefits under another VA education program may decide to exhaust their entitlement under the current benefit. Once entitlement has exhausted under the current benefit, he or she may be eligible for up to 12 months of benefits under the Post-9/11 GI Bill.

*Example: Joe elects Chapter 33 on August 15th, 2012 and relinquishes Chapter 30. However, Joe’s Chapter 30 delimiting date was up on July 15th, 2012. Since he is no longer eligible for Chapter 30 he does not have to relinquish it. (If the Veteran had a period of eligibility or mobilization under Chapter 1607, the delimiting date under Chapter 30 could be extended and the relinquishment of Chapter 30 would be valid.)*

**Scenario**

Jake has served 4 years in the Marine Corps from October 1, 2002 to September 30, 2006 and receives an honorable discharge. He attends college for a bachelor’s degree and in the process uses 37 months and 15 days of Chapter 30 (Montgomery GI Bill (MGIB)). Jake now wants to attain his Masters and applies for Chapter 33 (Post-9/11 GI Bill).

Q: How much entitlement would Jake have remaining after applying for Chapter 33? Would Jake have to relinquish a benefit to qualify for Chapter 33?

A: Jake has used 37 months and 15 days of Chapter 30 and is eligible for 10 months and 15 days of Chapter 33. Jake is eligible for a maximum of 48 months under any two VA programs. Jake does not have to relinquish a benefit to receive Chapter 33 because he has already exhausted Chapter 30 entitlement and is not eligible for any other benefit.

 [Back to Top](##Top)

#### 4.03 Eligibility of Post-9/11 GI Bill and Two or More Education Benefits

---

**a. Two or More Programs**

If an individual is eligible for benefits under the Post-9/11 GI Bill (Chapter 33) and two or more education programs such as the Montgomery GI Bill, Montgomery GI Bill-Selected Reserve, or Reserve Education Assistance Program, he or she must relinquish **ONE**. The individual remains eligible for the benefit they did not relinquish and is subject to the 48-month rule.

*Effective August 1, 2011 any member of the Armed Force cannot use the same period of service to establish eligibility under two or more education benefits.*

**Scenario**

*Joe enrolls in the Montgomery GI Bill (Chapter 30), and completes 4 years of active-duty service with the Navy and receives an honorable discharge on August 2, 2016. He joins the National Guard, signs a six-year enlistment, and subsequently becomes eligible for Montgomery GI Bill-Selected Reserve (Chapter 1606). He submits an application to VA for education benefits and wants to relinquish Chapter 1606 to establish eligibility for Chapter 33.*

*Q. Can Joe relinquish Chapter 1606 to establish eligibility under Chapter 33 and be eligible for Chapter 30?*

*A. No. After August 1, 2011 [Public Law 111-377](https://www.congress.gov/111/plaws/publ377/PLAW-111publ377.pdf), the Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act mandates that a qualifying period of service may be used to establish eligibility under only one benefit. In the case of Joe, by electing Chapter 33 he is relinquishing eligibility for Chapter 30 based on the same period of service. Relinquishing Chapter 1606 would only make sense if Joe has a Chapter 1606 kicker he wishes to be paid under Chapter 33.*

***Sources***

[PL 110-252](https://www.congress.gov/110/plaws/publ252/PLAW-110publ252.pdf), Chapter 33 Post-9/11 Educational Assistance, Sub-Chapter III Administrative Provisions, Section 3322. Bar to duplication of educational assistance benefits

Electronic Code of Federal Regulations [§ 21.5022 Eligibility under more than one program, Amendment from March 21, 2009](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15022)

 [Back to top](#TOP)

 **4.04 Dual Entitlement: Dependents**

---

**a. Dependents** may be eligible for education benefits under two or more VA education programs. An individual with dual eligibility may not receive more than one benefit concurrently or depending on the program, may have to elect which benefit to use. 

**b. Fry Scholarship Recipients**

* A child eligible for Chapter 33 under the Fry Scholarship and Transfer of Entitlement (ToE) benefit may not receive benefits from both sources concurrently. The individual must elect between the Fry Scholarship and Survivors’ and Dependents Educational Assistance (Chapter 35), losing eligibility for the benefit not elected based on the same event
* A child cannot receive benefits under the Fry Scholarship and Survivors’ and Dependents Educational Assistance (Chapter 35) based on a parent’s death

**c. Transfer of Entitlement (ToE) Recipients**

* An individual eligible for Chapter 33 benefits under the Transfer of Entitlement (ToE) and the Fry Scholarship may not receive benefits from both sources concurrently. An individual must elect which benefit to receive first and will retain eligibility for the other benefit

* Effective January 4, 2011 an individual eligible for ToE from more than one entitlement source may not receive benefits concurrently. The individual must elect the ToE entitlement source to receive first and will retain eligibility from the other source

**Scenario**

For example, if a child is eligible for ToE from both parents, he or she must choose which source of entitlement to utilize first.

[Back to Top](##Top)

## 4.05 Dependents Also Eligible Based on Their Own Service

---

**a.** **Eligibility Based on Own Service**

Dependents eligible for Chapter 33 under ToE, and their own service, may receive benefits under both sources of entitlement concurrently.

These individuals are not subject to the 48-month rule. Entitlement transferred to a transferee does not count against the 48-month cap for that individual and does count against the transferor’s 48-month cap.

*For Example: A claimant is eligible for ToE and receives 36 months of entitlement from a parent. The dependent receiving ToE has used 3 months of Chapter 30, which they have relinquished, to receive Chapter 33. The dependent in this case is not subject to the 48-month rule because ToE benefits are always charged against the transferor’s entitlement.*

***Sources***

[PL 111-377](https://www.congress.gov/111/plaws/publ377/PLAW-111publ377.pdf), Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act of 2010, Title I—Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance, Section 111. Bar to duplication of certain educational assistance benefits

Electronic Code of Federal Regulations. [§ 21.9570 Transfer of entitlement](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_19570)

Electronic Code of Federal Regulations. [§ 21.4020 Two or more programs](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14020)

Training Slides: PL 111-377\_Training

 [Back to top](##Top)

## 4.06 Transfer of Entitlement Issues

---

**a. General**

After separating from the Armed Forces, individuals cannot designate a new dependent to receive Transfer of Entitlement (ToE). In addition, the effective date for ToE cannot be modified to an earlier date. 

All modifications and revocations for ToE requested by the Transferor must be made through milConnect. RPO’s will no longer accept requests communicated in any other manner.

If correspondence is received from a Transferor requesting a modification or revocation, the VCE should respond via correspondence and insert the following:

“*We have received your request for Transfer of Entitlement modifications. Unfortunately, we are unable to complete your request. All requests for modifications and revocations must be communicated to Department of Defense through the milConnect website located at the following address:*[***https://milconnect.dmdc.osd.mil/milconnect/***](https://milconnect.dmdc.osd.mil/milconnect/)*”*

**b. Modification to Transfer of Entitlement (ToE)**

* A transferor may modify the transferred entitlement at any time. Any modification made will apply only to the unused transferred entitlement.

**b. Revocation of Transfer of Entitlement**

* A transferor may revoke the transferred entitlement at any time. The revocation will apply to all unused transferred entitlement.

***Sources***

[Procedural Advisory: Post-9/11 GI Bill Transfer of Entitlement Modifications and Revocations](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000096185/Procedural-Advisory-Post-911-GI-Bill-Transfer-of-Entitlement-Modifications-and-Revocations?query=Revoke%20ToE)

[Back to Top](##Top)

## 4.07 The 81-Month Rule

---

**a. Background**

Effective October 1, 2013, [Public Law 112-154](https://www.congress.gov/112/plaws/publ154/PLAW-112publ154.pdf) “Honoring America’s Veterans and Caring for Camp Lejeune Families Act of 2012”, authorizes VA to award up to 81 months of entitlement to individuals who use the Survivors’ and Dependent’s Educational Assistance program (Chapter 35) combined with entitlement from the other VA education programs. To deal with this scenario, VA is in the process of adding functionality to the Long Term Solution (LTS) and Benefits Delivery Network (BDN) Information Technology (IT) systems. In the meantime, manual procedures will be used by Regional Processing Office (RPO) personnel in the adjudication of affected claims. 

**b. Important Points**

1. The extension does not apply to individuals who have **exhausted** 48 months of benefits **prior** to October 1, 2013 (i.e. it does not apply if the BDN No Pay Date is prior to October 2, 2013, or the LTS Entitlement Exhaust Date is **prior** to October 1, 2013).

2. Individuals who use Chapter 35 benefits and Chapter 31 **cannot exceed** a maximum of 48 months of entitlement between those two sources.

3. Individuals who use non-35 benefits **cannot exceed** 48 months of entitlement between those non-35 sources.

**c. Procedures**:

VCEs will have to manually adjust Prior VA Training in BDN or LTS to ensure this new 81 month cap is appropriately applied. During processing, determine if claimant is entitled to additional entitlement and, if necessary, use the attached spreadsheet to determine the amount of Prior VA Training to generate the correct amount of benefit entitlement.

1. Determine if the claimant is-

i. Applying for Chapter 35 benefits and has used (or transferred out) entitlement under Chapter 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 1606, 1607, or section 903;

or

ii. Applying for benefits under Chapter 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 1606, 1607, or section 903, and has used entitlement under Chapter 35

2.  If 1(a) or 1(b) applies, proceed to step 3. If neither 1(a) nor 1(b) apply, process the claim normally.

3. Determine if the claimant has exhausted 48 months of entitlement prior to October 1, 2013. If yes, no additional action is necessary - deny the claim because the 48 month rule applies. If no, go to step 4.

4. Determine if the claim is for Chapter 32 or section 903. If yes, contact the Education Service Training Team via email at [VAVBAWAS/CO/225A](mailto:VAVBAWAS/CO/225A?subject=Entitlement%20Issues%20) for further instructions. If no, go to step 5.

5. Use the attached Job Aid to determine the amount of Prior VA Training to be entered into the appropriate benefit processing system drop box.

* Note 1: Do not enter any entitlement transferred in through ToE.
* Note 2: The Job Aid can be used for both original and supplemental claims. In the case of a supplemental claim where some entitlement has already been used, you don’t need to enter that entitlement in the Job Aid as it is designed to generate the correct Original Entitlement.

Enter claimant information for each claim involving adjusted Prior VA Training on the “81-Month Tracking Worksheet” and submit it by encrypted email to the Business Process Development Team mailbox ([VAVBAWAS/CO/224A](mailto:VAVBAWAS/CO/224A?subject=Entitlement%20Issues%20)) by close of business each Friday. If no affected claims are processed during a given week, a submission is not required. A new (non-cumulative) spreadsheet should be sent each week, and Education Service will compile a cumulative list of claims that will require adjustment once the BDN and LTS systems have been updated.

**Sources:**

Procedural Advisory Procedural Advisory: Implementing the 81 Month Rule for Survivors’ and Dependents’ Educational Assistance Program Beneficiaries [Public Law 112-154](https://www.congress.gov/112/plaws/publ154/PLAW-112publ154.pdf)

[Back to top](##Top)

**4.08** **48-Month Rule Based on Carr v. Wilkie Court Case**

---

See procedures for chapter 33 extensions based upon Carr v. Wilkie decision in [Part 4: Chapter 13 - Miscellaneous Award Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073684?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), section 13.07: Entitlement Extension Based Upon Carr v. Wilkie Court Case

Last updated:

December 18, 2015

4.08 added on September 15, 2020