# Policy Issues IMPLEMENT AS ADVISED

**DRAFT Part XI: Chapter 2 - Policy Issues   IMPLEMENT AS ADVISED.**

[**Subchapter I**   Processing Chapter 1607 Original Claims](#SI)  
[2.01 Purpose](#201)  
[2.02 Overview of Interim Procedures (Historical)](#202)   
[2.03 Transition Procedures and Permanent Procedures](#203)  
[2.04 Processing Applications and Elections for Chapter 1607](#204)  
[2.05 Reviewing DMDC Eligibility Information](#205)   
[2.06 Additional Eligibility Issues](#206)  
[2.07 Chapter 30/1607 Elections Based on Same Service](#207)  
[2.08 Certificate of Eligibility](#208)  
[2.09 Relations With DoD Contact Points](#209)  
  
[**Subchapter II**  Payment Issues](#SII)  
[2.10 Purpose](#210)   
[2.11 Administrative Errors](#211)  
[2.12 Procedural and Appellate Rights](#212)  
  
[**Appendix A** – DMDC Codes Abbreviations and Acronyms](#A)  
[**Appendix B** - VA REAP Website (Screen) Format](#B)

 

**SUBCHAPTER I.  Processing Chapter 1607 Original Claims**

**2.01 Purpose**

---

This chapter covers policy and processing instructions needed to implement the Chapter 1607 program. Chapter 1 describes the provisions of Chapter 1607. Chapters 3 through 8 describe the chapter 1607 BDN (Benefit Delivery Network) system. Chapter 9 gives instructions for out-of-system processing and Chapter 10 provides code tables.

**2.02 Overview of Interim Procedures** (Historical Only)

---

Initially, all Chapter 1607 awards were processed out-of-system using interim procedures described below in this paragraph and in more detail in Chapter 9, subchapter I and Appendix A of chapter 9. These out-of-system payments were made through the Chapter 34 BDN system using transactions 06A and 06L (work-study only). Here are the interim procedures used until the Chapter 1607 BDN system was deployed.

**a**.  **Review of Pending Cases**.  When Chapter 1607 implementation begins, RPOs (Regional Processing Office) should run a report from TIMS (The Imaging Management System) retrieving all those claims marked as “CH 1607” or "CH 1607+" in the Facility Code (FC) box (see RPO letter 22-05-14) and begin processing them. As required by the RPO letter, RPOs should continue to run periodic reports as long as there are pending Chapter 1607 claims and provide monthly reports (due to Education Service on the first of every month) to VACO (Veterans Affairs Central Office) (Strategy Development Staff ([225B](mailto:225B.VBACO@va.gov%20?subject=DRAFT%20Part%20XI%3A%20Chapter%202%20-%20Policy%20Issues%20%20%20IMPLEMENT%20AS%20ADVISED.%20))). RPOs will pay pending claims in accordance with the following priorities until a BDN system is functional:  

(1) The first priority are claimants who are entitled to Chapter 1607 benefits but not for any period already paid under a different benefit program. Also, they should not have an overpayment remaining from another benefit.

(2) The second priority are claimants who are currently receiving Chapter 1606 benefits.

(3) The last priority are claimants who have received Chapter 1606 in the past and are due an adjustment but are not currently in school.   The RPO should designate a holding folder in TIMS for these priority 3 cases.

**b.**  **Use of TIMS**.  All Chapter 1607 related documents will be scanned into TIMS. There is a REAP (Reserve Educational Assistance Program) Benefit Type in TIMS. TIMS controls will be the only controls on individual cases during the interim processing period.  When a claim for Chapter 1607 is received, the VCEs (Veterans Claims Examiners) will continue to enter “CH 1607” or "CH 1607+" in the FC box in the individual's TIMS record as indicated in RPO letter 22-05-14. VCEs should change this entry to "REAP" to indicate that a claim was adjudicated. Use REAP+ in cases in which the RPO paid for the Fall 2005 term and an enrollment for a Spring 2006 term is pending or a VA Form 22-1999b was received after the lump sum award was issued. These will be worked in the BDN 1607 system when it is installed.  See also [subparagraph g](#202g) and paragraph 9.02c, *Note* regarding other special entries in the FC box.

**c.  CEST and BDN Controls.** The CEST (Claims Establishment) command will not be used in Chapter 1607 cases during the interim period. There will be no BDN controls on Chapter 1607 claims.

**d.  Jurisdiction**.  Apply existing jurisdiction rules given in part III, paragraph 1.02a. If the enrollment involves schools in multiple jurisdictions (whether now or in the past), the RPO with jurisdiction over the primary school the claimant is currently enrolled in (or most recently enrolled in if there is no current enrollment) will assume jurisdiction.

**e.  BIRLS**.  A BIRLS (Beneficiary Identification and Records Locator) record should already exist for most Chapter 1607 claimants. If not, create one using the BFLD (BIRLS Folder) (command. Transfer TIMS folders using standard procedures. It is essential that BIRLS reflect the current location of the EDU folder. To build a BIRLS record use the following process:

(1) Enter the following information on the “Ready” screen. Use the BFLD (BIRLS Folder) command, the operator’s password, the file number, the payee number, and the first, middle, and last name of the veteran. Press the “ALT ENTER” key.

(2)  BDN will show the BIRLS LOC (Location) screen. Under “FLDR TYPE” (folder type), BIRLS should show any existing folders. At the bottom of the LOC screen, BIRLS shows the message “THIS IS THE LAST SCREEN FOR THIS COMMAND. VALID NEXT SCREENS ARE INQUIRY”. Locate the field “Y ESTABLISH A EDU FOLDER.” Enter “Y” in the field immediately to the left of the word ESTABLISH. Enter “EDU” in the blank space located between “ESTABLISH A” and “FOLDER.” Press the “ALT ENTER” key.

**f.  End Products**.  End products will not be used for Chapter 1607 during the Interim period. Instead, VCE (Veterans Claims Examiner) time devoted to Chapter 1607 should be recorded as "Other Measured Hours" in accordance with established procedures.

**g.  One-time Payments for IHL and NCD.**  During the interim period, the RPOs should issue a one-time payment to claimants pursuing IHL (Institute of Higher Learning) or NCD (Non-College Degree) training. The award procedures are described in Chapter 9, subchapter I. This one-time payment will be for all enrollment periods of record through the fall 2005 period. This payment will include retroactive periods during which Chapter 1606 may have been paid.

*Note: After the initial one-time payment, if the RPO discovers a claimant was not paid for some past (retroactive) enrollments, as an exception, the RPO can make a second one-time payment using the interim procedure.*

(1)  If the school is measured on a regular term basis, the RPOs will pay through the end of the Fall 2005 term. If the school is measured on standard terms, pay through the end of the term ending closest to December 31, even if the award period ends after December 31, 2005. For example, a student is enrolled at the University of Phoenix for the periods 9/15/05 – 11/15/05 and 11/30/05 through 1/10/06. Pay through 1/10/06.

(2)  If the school is not measured on a term basis, pay through December 31, 2005.

(3)  During the interim period, the RPOs will not process notices of change of enrollment (VA Forms 22-1999b) received after the one-time payment is issued. RPOs should control any notices of change received in TIMS so that they may be processed once the Chapter 1607 BDN system is installed. Use "1607 99b" in the Facility Code box in TIMS instead of "CH 1607" or "CH 1607+" if a VA Form 22-1999b is received after the one-time interim payment is made.

**h.  Correspondence, Flight, and Apprenticeship/OJT Training.**  The RPOs should prepare the case for payment by the St. Louis RPO as described in Chapter 9, subchapter II. Payments will not be restricted to one time.

**i. Work-study.** If a person is receiving work-study under Chapter 1606 and converts to Chapter 1607, pay the work-study benefit under Chapter 1607 effective from the date Chapter 1607 is awarded. See paragraph 9.02j for payment procedures for Chapter 1607 work-study. If a person is receiving work-study benefits at a DoD facility to assist with the Chapter 1606 program and converts to Chapter 1607, do not interrupt the contract. Pay the full benefits under the existing contract but do not authorize any new contracts of this type (see par. 1.07e as to the issue involved). The Work Study Management System now has a Chapter 1607 benefit category.

**j.  Direct Deposit**.  No direct deposit of benefits will be available during the interim period. This is because the Chapter 34 BDN system does not have a direct deposit feature. Therefore, all payments will be made by check.

**k.  Inquiries**.  Because there initially will be no BDN master record to record Chapter 1607 payments, the only record of payments will be (1) the record accessed through the TINQ (Treasury Inquiry) command and (2) as recorded in TIMS.

**2.03  Transition Procedures and Permanent Procedures**

---

 When the Chapter 1607 BDN system is available, RPOs should discontinue the Interim procedures described in [paragraph 2.02](#202) above and begin normal claims processing. The new Chapter 1607 system will have most of the features of the Chapter 30 and Chapter 1606 BDN systems but not all. See paragraph 3.01 for a discussion of features.

**a. Priority for Creating BDN records**

(1) Create BDN records for cases paid under the Interim procedure that have spring '06 enrollments waiting to be paid.

(2) Create BDN records for cases paid under the Interim procedure that have no further enrollments to be paid. It is important that BDN reflect payment for these cases.

*Note: All cases paid using the Interim procedures must be in BDN by March 24, 2006.*

(3) Work the remaining Chapter 1607 backlog.

(4) Finally (to the extent possible), create BDN records for claims processed during the Interim procedure that did not result in a payment (i.e., claims that resulted in denial or issuance of a Certificate of Eligibility).

**b. Procedures for converting cases with Interim system Payments**

(1) Process an award in BDN in the 1607 system. Input all awards paid during the Interim and any subsequent award lines to be paid (ex: Spring, 2006) . Suppress the BDN award letter and **DO NOT certify the case to release payment.** Forward the case to be authorized.

(2) Once the case is approved, the Senior VCE should return the claim to the VCE to process an 04E fiscal transaction under the FIST (command on the F25 screen. Place an "X" after the 04E transaction, use 53B as the Code/Class, insert the total debt being recouped under Amount (this will be the amount of the Interim payment plus any Chapter 1606 debt that was created; use the amount in the Total Award field, cell T40 in the Spreadsheet). Use the current date in the "DATE" field. The case is then sent back to the authorizer, who should authorize the 04E transaction. This will transfer the debt to the claimant's newly created 1607 BDN record so it can be recouped. The VCE should prepare PCGL AWD 23.  Once the case is authorized the Senior VCE should send this letter to the claimant.

(3) After the Senior VCE authorizes the FIST transaction under the FAUT  (Fiscal Authorization) command, he or she must perform the last two steps in the process:

(i) Use the CORR (Correction of Master Record) command to change the Collection Indicator from "1" to "3" on the M01 screen.

(ii) Under the CERT (Certification of Enrollment) command, certify the enrollment through the latest date possible to recoup the debt and issue the balance of funds due the claimant.

*NOTE: It is **CRITICAL** that all these steps be completed **AND** authorized **ON THE SAME DAY.** The RPOs can determine the best procedure to ensure this, but ultimately once the award in step 1 is authorized, every step must follow, on the same day, and in this sequence.*

**c. Procedures for Paying a Chapter 1607 Award With Chapter 1606 Overpayment.**  If the claimant was not paid during the interim period, slightly different procedures must be followed. These are claimants who have not been awarded Chapter 1607 benefits at all and there is a Chapter 1606 record that must be terminated to pay the same period under Chapter 1607 (Priority 2 claimants who were not paid out-of-system).

(1) The VCE should capture the existing Chapter 1606

(2) (See Policy Advisory dated 6/9/06) The VCE should terminate the 1606 record effective the first day of eligibility under Chapter 1607, or the first day of an enrollment after that, just as with any case that involves 1606 periods being converted to Chapter 1607. Suppress the letter.

(3) Using the FIST command, process an 04E transaction. Use 1607 as the benefit type on the Ready screen. On the F25 screen, place an X after 04E-ESTABLISH/INCREASE A/R. The CODE/CLASS is **61C.** The TRANS AMT is the amount of the 1606 debt created in step 2 above. The DATE is the current date. Upon ALT/ENT, the FIST is ready for the Senior to FAUT.

(4) Send the case to the Senior VCE to authorize the 04E transaction (FAUT). Immediately after authorization, the Senior should return the claim to the VCE.

(5)  (See Policy Advisory dated 12/6/06 and Policy Advisory dated 6/9/06) The VCE will process the 1607 award, inputting all enrollments to be paid. The VCE should certify all periods of enrollment possible. Suppress all BDN letters in the process and send PCGL AWD 23 instead to advise the claimant of the award of benefits. Return the claim to the Senior VCE for authorization.

(6) Once the Chapter 1607 award is authorized, the 1606 debt should be recouped and any balance due the claimant will be issued.

***NOTE: The 1607 award should be done as soon as possible following the creation of the 1606 debt to prevent the claimant from receiving unnecessary collection letters from Debt Management Center.***         

**d. Use of TIMS**.  All Chapter 1607 related documents will be scanned into TIMS. There is a REAP Benefit Type in TIMS.

**e. CEST.** Use the CEST process in the same manner as for other benefits.

**f. Date of Claim in BDN.** For priority 1 cases (as defined in [par. 2.02a](#202a)), the RPOs will use the actual date of claim or 12/21/05 if the claim was received in the RPO before that date. RPOs should use a 360 EP and cancel the EP credit when entering priority 1 cases in BDN that were paid in the interim and require no further action.

(1)  Priority 1 cases for which an additional issue has arrived requiring further processing should use a 380 EP and a date of claim of 2/21/06. EP credit should be taken.

(2)  For priority 2 and 3 cases, the RPOs will use the actual date of claim but a date no earlier than 2/21/06.

**g**.  Jurisdiction.  Apply existing jurisdiction rules given in part III, paragraph 1.02a. If the enrollment involves schools in multiple jurisdictions (whether now or in the past), the RPO with jurisdiction over the primary school the claimant is currently enrolled in (or most recently enrolled in if there is no current enrollment) will assume jurisdiction.

**h. Work-study.** Use the the F15 screen (see par. 8.02) within the Chapter 1607 system to make work-study payments (06L transactions). If a person is receiving work-study benefits at a DoD (Department of Defense) facility to assist with the Chapter 1606 program and converts to Chapter 1607, do not interrupt the contract. Pay the full benefits under the existing contract but do not authorize any new contracts of this type (see par. 1.07e as to the issue involved). The Work Study Management System now has a Chapter 1607 benefit category.

**i.  Correspondence, Flight, and Apprenticeship/OJT Training.**  See Chapter 9, subchapter II for special procedures.

**2.04  Processing Applications and Elections for Chapter 1607**

---

*Note : RPOs should encourage claimants to enter “1607” at the top of the VA Forms 22-1990 or 22-1995 or in the Remarks section of a VONAPP (Veteran Online Application) original application form.* (VONAPP does not contain a Remarks section for the 22-1995.)

**a.  Application Required**

(1) A formal claim for Chapter 1607 on VA Form 22-1990 is required if the individual has never previously filed a VA Form 22-1990. The VA Form 22-1990 (whether paper or electronic) should specifically request Chapter 1607. Caution: see the exceptions to this rule as described in [subparagraph b](#204b) below.

(2) If the individual has already filed a VA Form 22-1990 (for other education benefits), a new 1990 is not required. The individual should file a VA Form 22-1995 requesting Chapter 1607 if he or she has previously filed a VA Form 22-1990.

**b.  When Chapter 1607 Must be Adjudicated.** As indicated in part III, paragraph 3.04e, VCEs must adjudicate each specific benefit that is claimed on VA Form 22-1990. This applies to Chapter 1607 as well as any other benefits. In addition, VCEs must consider possible Chapter 1607 eligibility when the claimant has filed for benefits but not specifically listed Chapter 1607 on the application. Apply the following principles when processing VA Forms 22-1990 and 22-1995:

(1) If the claimant checks one specific benefit such as Chapter 1606 but is eligible for Chapter 1607, VCEs should pay the claimed benefit and explain the benefits of Chapter 1607 using the appropriate prompts in PCGL letter DEV 14 , which has been modified to highlight the differences between Chapter 1607 and Chapter 1606. Inform the claimant that he or she may elect Chapter 1607 if desired.  

**Example:** A claimant requests Chapter 1606. He is eligible for both Chapters 1606 and 1607. Pay the claimed benefit which is Chapter 1606 even though it is the lower benefit.  The RPO should sendPCGL letter DEV 14 which has been modified to include prompts to inform the claimant of his REAP eligibility, but do not control for an election.

(2) If the claimant requests only Chapter 1607 but is eligible for another benefit, pay Chapter 1607 and send PCGL letter DEV 14 to explain the options. However, do NOT pay Chapter 1607 for periods in the past where another benefit is the greater benefit.

**Example:** A claimant requests Chapter 1607 but is eligible for Chapter 30. He received Chapter 30 benefits in the past for the same period for which the person is now eligible for Chapter 1607. Pay Chapter 1607 for the current enrollment period. Do not award retroactive Chapter 1607 benefits in this situation unless, after receiving DEV 14, the individual states that he wishes the lower benefit.

(3) If the claimant does not ask for Chapter 1607 but asks for a benefit that he or she is not eligible for such as Chapter 1606 and the RPO determines the claimant is eligible for Chapter 1607, we should disallow the benefit they requested and process the claim under Chapter 1607. The BDN disallowance letter should go out for the benefit to which the claimant is not eligible (Chapter 1606).

**Example**: A claimant requests Chapter 1606. The RPO determines that the claimant is not eligible for Chapter 1606 but is eligible for Chapter 1607. The RPO should disallow the claim for Chapter 1606 and process the claim under Chapter 1607. 

(4) If the claimant is currently eligible for multiple benefits based on separate periods of service and the claimant checks several benefits or checks none of the benefits listed on VA Form 22-1990, we must have a clear election before making any payment. 

**Example**: The claimant clearly indicates he is claiming Chapters 1606, 1607 and 30. He is eligible for Chapter 30 and Chapter 1607. The RPO determines he has Chapter 30 entitlement remaining. Do not initially pay any benefit; we need a benefit election. Process the Chapter 1606 disallowance in BDN and send PCGL letter DEV 14

*Note #1:  RPOs may take a claimant's verbal election of benefits or one submitted through Right Now Web.  The RPO should record the election in TIMS.*

**Note #2: For an original claim, continue control under the end product established (200 or 260 for example) for 30 days while awaiting an election. If no response is received within 30 days, disallow the claim for failure to prosecute. Send*      letter DIS 3 PCGL**to the claimant upon the Senior VCE's approval.* 

(5) If a claimant elects Chapter 1607 for a period for which he or she was paid under another benefit (for example, Chapter 1606), any enrollment periods paid elsewhere must be terminated before paying that same period under Chapter 1607. Using Chapter 1606 as an example, the VCE must create an overpayment for Chapter 1606 and offset that overpayment from the Chapter 1607 BDN award. See [instructions in 2.03 (c).](#203c) The payment issued through Chapter 1607 will recoup the debt created by the termination action and the remaining balance will be issued to the claimant.

(6) If the claimant is eligible for multiple benefits based on the same period of service, see [paragraph 2.07](#207) for special procedures.

**2.05.  Reviewing DMDC Eligibility Information**  
(See Policy Advisory dated May 23, 2006)

---

*Note: VCEs should not routinely review for possible Chapter 1607 eligibility every time a case receiving another benefit is handled. VCEs should review for Chapter 1607 eligibility when processing VA Forms 22-1990 as described in* [*paragraph 2.04*](#204) *above. VCEs should also routinely review for Chapter 1607 eligibility whenever VA Form 22-1995 is received for any education benefit.*  

**a.  Accessing the VA REAP website.**   The Projects team of Education Service (225D) will provide each RPO access to the VA REAP website which contains Chapter 1607 eligibility data as provided by DMDC (Defense Manpower Data Center). This website is password protected. Password distribution will be limited within the RPOs. There is a “Help” function for those with access. See [Appendix A](#A) and [B](#B) for information on codes, abbreviations, and acronyms used on this site.

**b.  Using the DMDC data:** 

(1) General. A record on the VA REAP website will only exist if there is at least one period that is qualifying for Chapter 1607. The VCE should examine any periods of service listed on this record to see which ones are coded as Eligible (MA). There may be several such periods of service; some may be coded Eligible and others not. There may be one long period (it may consist of several consecutive short periods) that qualifies the individual for Chapter 1607. The VA REAP website calculates the 90th day of service for eligibility purposes. (BDN award processing determines when one year is completed and when two years are completed.)  If there is evidence which conflicts with the VA REAP screen, see [subparagraph d](#205d) below.

(2) Disability. If a discharge is for disability, the VA REAP website should indicate that fact as well. Caution: Initially, there will be no disability information available. If the individual indicates that he or she was discharged for disability, ask the DoD coordinator to refer the case to the reserve component's contact point.

*Note: The VA-REAP website will not code an individual as Eligible for a period of service unless the individual has completed 90 days of that period. However, the person may have already established Chapter 1607 eligibility based on an earlier period which is coded as Eligible.*

**c.  Capturing Eligibility Data in TIMS.**   Capture the individual's eligibility screen in TIMS.

**d.** (See Policy Advisory dated 9/26/06) **Using Alternative Data.**  As noted in paragraph 1.02a(2), the services are required to provide written notice of chapter 1607 eligibility to each service member. As of this writing, a standardized DoD written notice has not been developed yet. Individual components may develop their own notice. We will inform the RPOs when DoD implements this provision or if individual components implement this provision. We are unsure if such documents will be used to establish eligibility or they will be purely informational. If there is any question about documents that different services may develop, contact [Education Service (225B)](mailto:VAVBAWAS/CO/225B?subject=DRAFT%20Part%2011%20Chapter%202%20-%20Policy%20Issues%20-%20Using%20Alternative%20Data).

(1) Alternative Evidence. *See VBA Letter 22-09-14.* Alternative evidence of active duty which could be qualifying for Chapter 1607 may exist such as a DD Form 214 and/or orders, a 30D screen showing active duty in a reserve component, a BIRLS record, the claimant's statement of service on his or her application for benefits.  If there is no VA REAP record on the website and alternative sources indicate the person may be eligible, the RPO's DoD Coordinator should contact the service department contact point to resolve the issue.  The RPOs should accept the determination of eligibility from the service contact point and should document the verification in TIMS. The intranet website https://vbaw.vba.va.gov/EDUCATION/job\_aids.asp has all the current DoD contacts for the RPO DoD Coordinators to use. Do not contact the individual states within the National Guard without approval from the Army or Air Guard contact point. Do not attempt to establish eligibility based on any kind of alternative evidence without contacting the service department.

*NOTE: If there is any contradiction between the VA REAP website and other sources as to secondary (non-eligibility) issues such as the activation ending date or additional periods of service, VCEs should determine the issue based on the evidence available. DoD agrees that the DD Form 214 has precedence over the dates on the VA REAP website.   For example, if the VA REAP website shows an eligible period and does not show an ending date for that period but other sources (BIRLS, 30D, claimant's application, DD 214) do show an ending date, the RPO should accept the ending date as established based on the other sources. The RPO's DoD coordinator should still refer the matter to the service contact point to properly update the VA REAP website. Do not delay processing the claim in this situation. The VCE may decide factual issues such as service dates but may not determine the eligibility status of any period.*

(2) If there is no VA REAP record on the website or any other type of evidence to substantiate the claim, disallow the claim with PCGL letter DIS 25.

**e. Review for Continued Chapter 1607 Eligibility.** There is currently no automated mechanism in place that would notify VA if someone's eligibility status changes. Until further notice, VCEs should review Chapter 1607 eligibility every time they handle a case.

**2.06  Additional Eligibility Issues**

---

**a.  ROTC.**  See paragraph 1.03d regarding this issue. Review the VA Form 22-1990 as well as the claimant's DOD screen under the Chapter 1606 program if he or she has one. A reservist granted an ROTC scholarship under [section 2107 of title 10 U.S](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:2107 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title10-section2107)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true). Code has tuition and fees paid by the government and receives a monthly living stipend. Receipt of only a monthly stipend for being in Senior ROTC program is not considered financial assistance under [section 2107](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:2107 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title10-section2107)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true). The claimant may not receive Chapter 1607 during an ROTC scholarship period.

*Note : As of this writing, the data referred to in* [*paragraph 2.05*](#205) *will not contain any data on ROTC scholarships. Refer to the reserve component contact point if it appears the person is receiving ROTC scholarship under* [*section 2107*](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:2107 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title10-section2107)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true)*. Do not deny the claim without first referring the issue to the reserve component.*

*Example: A servicemember eligible for Chapter 1607 receives a one-year ROTC scholarship in the Air Force ROTC program. During that one-year period, the servicemember is not eligible for Chapter 1607. After receiving an ROTC commission, the servicemember goes back to the Selected Reserve, and is then eligible for Chapter 1607.*

**b. Eligibility to Chapter 30 Based on Same Service**. For a complete explanation of this topic see [paragraph 2.07](#207) below.

**c.  Disallowance.** Process Chapter 1607 disallowance in the same manner as Chapters 1606 and 30.

**2.07  Chapter 30/1607 Elections Based on Same Service**

---

See policy advisory dated December 26, 2007.  As noted in paragraph 1.03f, an individual may not use the same period of service to establish eligibility under Chapter 30 and Chapter 1607, but must elect (an irrevocable election) which benefit he or she wishes the service to be credited toward. This election will be an issue for the RPOs when an individual appears on the Chapter 1607 the VA REAP website and has completed at least 2 years of service and there's no indication the individual declined Chapter 30 at initial entry (i.e., the 30D Status code is not code 04).

**a.  Assisting With a 2-Way or 3-Way Election Decision (Chs. 30, 1606,  and 1607).** Here are some variables to consider when advising an individual regarding the decision to elect Chapter 30 vs. Chapter 1607. The effect of this election on Chapter 1606 eligibility for an individual in their initial 6-year commitment is also indicated. This information is critical for an individual to make an informed decision. PCGL letter DEV 14 provides a 2-way development letter (Chs. 30 and 1607). A 3-way letter is under development.

(1)  Delimiting Period.  Chapter 1607 requires the individual to remain in the Selected Reserve (or the IRR if called up from the IRR) to continue to be eligible to receive benefits. By contrast, eligibility for Chapter 30 benefits lasts for 10 years after last discharge from 90 days or more of active service (for the 2X4 program, it is 10 years after the 4 years of reserve service). This is a major difference in these two benefits. Exception: Persons discharged for disability receive Chapter 1607 for 10 years from date of eligibility. Therefore, these individuals do have a fixed delimiting period.

*Note: Some servicemembers may want to leave the Selected Reserve and will just be interested in receiving the retroactive benefits under Chapter 1607. Also, if the servicemember completed his or her educational objective, the person may primarily be concerned with retroactive benefits rather than any future benefits. Such persons are better off with Chapter 1607 than electing Chapter 30.*

(2) Chapter 30 2 X 4. Individuals eligible for Chapter 30 based on 2 X 4 service ( 2 years of active duty plus 4 years in the Selected Reserve) are eligible for the higher 3-year rate (category 1B) under Chapter 30. This is $1034 a month for Chapter 30 vs. $827.20 a month for Chapter 1607. Therefore, if a person is already a 2 X 4 or may extend or reenlist to become a 2 X 4, Chapter 30 is obviously the better alternative.

(3)  Months of Entitlement: Individuals eligible for Chapter 1607 are entitled to 36 months entitlement, but are bound by the 48 month maximum rule anytime two or more benefits are used. Individuals under Chapter 30 may get less entitlement depending on the length of service and the separation reason. For example, a person discharged involuntarily after 17 months could elect Chapter 30 under category IIIA (involuntary separation) but would only receive 17 months of entitlement whereas he would receive 36 months under Chapter 1607. This difference can make Chapter 1607 more attractive in some cases.

(4)  Additional Contributions.   Under Chapter 30, an individual can contribute $600 while on active duty and receive an increased monthly benefit of $150 for full-time training. This benefit is not available under Chapter 1607.

**UPDATE: $600 Buy-Up Program.** The REAP "buy up" was added in the National Defense Authorization Act for FY 2008. Some Servicemembers may contribute up to an additional $600 to the GI Bill to receive increased monthly benefits. For an additional $600 contribution, you may receive up to $5,400 in additional GI Bill benefits. The additional contribution must be made while on active duty.

(5)  $1,200 Collection.  The military service is required to collect $1,200 from each individual who elects Chapter 30. Chapter 1607 does not require a $1,200 pay reduction to establish eligibility. However, the difference in rates between Chapter 30 (category 1A, the less than 3-year rate) and Chapter 1607 is only about $13. An individual might be better off electing Chapter 1607 if he or she planned to remain in the Selected Reserve (or the IRR if called up from the IRR) long enough to complete his or her educational objective. 

(6) Loss of Benefits During Call-up Period. If an individual chooses Chapter 30, he or she will lose any Chapter 1606 or Chapter 1607 benefits paid for periods during call-up. Also, there would be a collection of any overpayments.

(7) Benefit Differences. Chapter 30 permits accelerated payment, transfer of entitlement (in limited cases), Tuition Assistance Top-up, and has a national admission test benefit, whereas Chapter 1607 does not.

(8) Chapter 1606 Kicker. The Chapter 1606 kicker will be equally payable under Chapter 30 or Chapter 1607. There is no advantage one way or the other.

(9) Impact on Chapter 1606. If a person elects Chapter 1607, there is no effect on Chapter 1606 eligibility. The individual can use both benefits up to a maximum of 48 months. If a person elects Chapter 30, he or she will lose eligibility to Chapter 1606 (if the person is in the initial 6-year commitment period) from the date of call-up.

**b. Reserved**

**2.08.  Certificate of Eligibility**

---

Process Chapter 1607 COE(s) (Certificate of Eligibility) in the same manner as Chapters 1606 and 30. If the claimant is not currently eligible for Chapter 1607, but was in the past and entitled to retroactive benefits it will be necessary to issue a dictated COE rather than the BDN generated letter. Use PCGL letter AWD1, using the prompts for Chapter 1607 retroactive benefits only.

If a claimant requests only a COE (Certificate of Eligibility) and VA finds he or she is eligible for Chapter 1607 and another VA education benefit, it's possible to issue COE(s) for all benefits entitled to prior to receiving an election from the claimant. We can't pay an award without an election, but eligibility can be established for all benefits the claimant is entitled to prior to receiving the claimant's election statement. Using the BDN generated COE, request an election on the two text lines provided on the bottom of the COE screen, informing the claimant that benefits may not be paid under any education program until he or she informs VA of their choice of benefit.PCGL letter DEV14 is still necessary, to fully explain to the claimant the pros and cons for each benefit, but the claim does not need to be held back waiting for the election statement. This is only true when issuing COEs. If an award can be paid the election is still necessary beforehand if the claimant is eligible for 1607 and any other VA benefit.

**2.09  Relations With DoD Contact Points**

---

**a**. If the RPO has a question about DoD policy, contact Education Service before contacting DoD. If a local unit contacts an RPO with information that conflicts with the VA REAP website, the RPO's DoD Coordinator should contact the service department's contact point.

**b**. A claimant in a reserve component may on their own contact the unit directly if there are any questions concerning eligibility information on the VA REAP website.

**c**. If the claimant provides official evidence (such as DD Form 214 and orders) of being eligible for Chapter 1607 benefits or some other evidence of eligibility comes to light, the RPO's DoD Coordinator should refer this information to the service department's point of contact.

**d**. After the reserve unit (or Education Officer) has followed the normal VA REAP website correction procedures, the unit might still contact VA for assistance. In this case, VA should urge the unit to contact the appropriate Reserve/Guard contact point. If necessary, VA should give the unit the phone number and address of the appropriate contact point. VA should not give this phone number to individual reservists but should suggest that they contact their units.

**e.** Education Service periodically updates its internal website to record the DoD contact point(s). If an RPO becomes aware of any changes when communicating with a contact point or has difficulty reaching a contact point, notify the Education Service, Strategy Development Staff (225B). Send e-mail to [VAVBAWAS/CO/225B](mailto:225B.VBACO@va.gov%20?subject=DRAFT%20Part%20XI%3A%20Chapter%202%20-%20Policy%20Issues%20%20%20IMPLEMENT%20AS%20ADVISED.%20) or call (202) 273-7187.

**SUBCHAPTER I  PAYMENT ISSUES**

**2.10.  Purpose**

---

**a.  Effective date.** See paragraph 1.06e.

**b.  Tuition and Fees.** For a servicemember at any training time or a veteran training at less than 1/2 time, the rate payable is the lesser of the following:

(1) A monthly rate which will fully reimburse the tuition and fees of the course(s); or

(2) The Chapter 1607 institutional rate otherwise payable for the applicable training time.

*Note: Any Chapter 1606 kicker that is payable will be added to the rate calculated above.*

*Example: If a serviceperson with a $100 kicker were enrolled in a course at 1/2 time and the monthly rate which reimburses tuition and fees is $78.28, the RPO should add $50 to this rate (1/2 the full-time kicker).*

*Note 1: If the 90th day occurs in the middle of a term, VA calculates the monthly rate based on the length of the term and the tuition and fees for that term. VA pays this monthly rate from the 90th day. The same principle applies when the servicemember becomes eligible for the 60% or 80% rates or when the servicemember changes from active duty to veteran status or visa versa.*

**Note 2: The claimant's status (on active duty or not on active duty) is critical to paying the correct rate. VCEs should examine the evidence of record to determine periods of active duty. However, don't develop every case to determine if the person possibility had periods of active duty not reflected in the record.**

**c.  Award line Issues.**  There are a number of variables to consider when preparing Chapter 1607 award lines:

(1) date of Chapter 1607 eligibility (from DMDC);

(2)  periods of active duty that are qualifying for Chapter 1607;

(3)  periods of active duty that are not qualifying for Chapter 1607;

(4)  existence of Chapter 1606 kicker and effective date of Chapter 1606 kicker;

(5)  enrollment periods reported on enrollment certifications;

(6)  effective date of increase from 40% rate to 60% rate or to 80% rate;

(7)  periods of ineligibility for Chapter 1607 due to not being in Selected Reserve (or IRR) as reported by DMDC;

(8) enrollment periods in multiple fiscal years requiring use of multiple rate tables.

**Example 1:** Background: Army Reserve member is called up November 2, 2004 and serves until November 2, 2005 in a DoD approved contingency. The VA REAP website confirms those dates in the Activation Begin Date and Activation End Date fields. The record shows a Status Code of MA (member eligible) in the appropriate block. (See [Appendix B](#B) for detail on the VA REAP website.) During that period of service, the servicemember did not take any courses, but was eligible for the 40% after 90 consecutive days of active duty.  
  
The servicemember was eligible for Chapter 1606 before being called to active service, but did not have a Chapter 1606 kicker. Upon separation, this individual starts attending classes at the local university and sends in his (he has never made a claim to VA) VA Form 22-1990 claiming Chapter 1607.

Action: In this case, the VCE will ensure the DMDC screen shows the necessary information to process the claim. The VCE will also review any TIMS information and check his 30D and DOD screens. In this case, eligibility is established. The 60% rate level is payable from November 2, 2005.

**Example 2:**  Background: An Air National Guard member has been deployed and called up several times since September 11, 2001; in fact she was called up under title 32 and reported to the local airport to provide security during the national emergency on September 11, 2001 and was released December 11, 2001. She was also called to active service March 20, 2002 until October 30, 2003, and again on May 1, 2005 until November 1, 2005. She deployed overseas to several South West Asian countries in support of Iraqi Freedom and in support of the war in Afghanistan. She has copies of orders and the DD Form 214s that show the appropriate dates as listed above. This person was also able to take college courses while on active duty. She is currently eligible for Chapter 1606 and has received Chapter 1606 benefits in the past. This servicemember requested Chapter 1607 benefits using the VA Form 22-1995 submitted on VONAPP. The servicemember did not mention when she wished to begin receiving Chapter 1607.

Action: As the VCE reviews the VA REAP website, he notices that the period of service from September 11, 2001 to December 11, 2001, while serving as an airport guard is not listed on the VA REAP website.. The VCE does determine the VA REAP website shows the other two periods of call-up with Status Codes of MA. The VCE checks the TIMS record which shows all copies of orders and DD Form 214s to include the September 11, 2001 service. The VCE also checks the MINQ screens to see all enrollment periods and payments. The VCE now wonders about the first period (September 11, 2001) to determine why the person did not have an eligible period. The RPO DoD coordinator finds out from the Air Guard’s contact point that the service was State service under title 32, and the service did not count that service as eligible service for Chapter 1607.

The VCE determines the person attended school during the ineligible period and could not receive retroactive payment for that period. The VCE determines the individual should receive Chapter 1607 at the 60% level (because of the service from March 20, 2002 until October 30, 2003); also, the VCE determines that the person had previously attended school after October 30, 2003 and received $2,800 in Chapter 1606 benefits. The VCE determines the person should receive $4,100 in retroactive payments. This is the net figure after subtracting the $2,800 paid out under Chapter 1606 from the gross amount payable under Chapter 1607 of $6,900.00.

**d.  Lump-sum Awards**. As noted in Chapter 1, lump sum payment rules are the same as for Chapter 30. During the Interim period, we will pay persons in institutional training by a one-time payment for all cases regardless of training time. When the Chapter 1607 BDN system is operational, that system, like the Chapter 30 BDN system, will limit lump sum payments to servicemembers and veterans training at less than 1/2 time.

**e.  Work-study.** See [paragraph 2.03g.](#202g)  

**f.   Licensing and Certification.** Defer claims for these benefits pending further instructions. (See Policy Advisory dated 8/24/06)

**2.11  Administrative Errors**

---

**a.** If an eligibility determination results from error on the part of VA, DoD or DHS, terminate benefits effective the Date of Last Payment (DLP). Follow the procedures below to terminate benefits:

*Note:  In the interim period, we are not going to make award adjustments.*

**b.**Terminate benefits DLP only if one of the following applies:

(1) VA receives information from a DoD or DHS official (commanding officer, education officer, incentives officer, etc.) conceding administrative error. The DoD or DHS information can be in a letter or other means to include but not limited to a telephone call, fax, or e-mail.

(2)  VA receives a message or other source of information conceding administrative error. 

(3)  VA has made an administrative error.  (In this instance, prepare a formal administrative error decision.  (See pt. III, par. 2.03.))

**c.** Do not request a formal administrative error decision document from DoD or DHS. As the reserve components are responsible for these eligibility determinations, VA does not have authority to determine administrative error when eligibility is the issue.

**d.** Do not prepare a formal administrative decision based on a DoD or DHS administrative error decision. Annotate the TIMS record to show "Administrative Error" and include a summary of the specific information used in this determination.

**e.** If a Reservist indicates payment may have been made as a result of DoD or DHS administrative error, refer him or her to the specific component for consideration.

**2.12  Procedural and Appellate Rights**

---

**a.** General. A claimant has the right to appeal the fact of denial by VA of Chapter 1607 benefits to BVA (Board of Veterans Appeals). The claimant cannot appeal the eligibility decision by DoD/DHS to BVA, because by law, only DoD/DHS has the authority for determining eligibility. However, the RPOs should furnish appeal paragraphs on denial decisions. See subparagraph b regarding how to process appeals regarding eligibility decisions.

**b.** DoD/DHS Eligibility Determination

(1) If the RPO denied Chapter 1607 benefits solely on a DoD/DHS (VA REAP website) determination of ineligibility or lack of other types of evidence, restrict the ISSUE for the SOC (Statement of the Case) to the DoD/DHS determination. Clearly indicate the following:

(i) VA made its decision based on the DoD/DHS (VA REAP website and no other supporting evidence) determination of ineligibility; and

(ii) VA has no jurisdiction over Chapter 1607 eligibility determinations. Only DoD/DHS make these determinations. Do not include in the SOC the substantive issue of eligibility. Eligibility is not the issue of the case. The issue is: Did VA follow the DoD/DHS decision?

(2) If any evidence conflicts with dates, periods of service, number of periods of service, or the service cannot confirm any evidence, then develop for as much evidence as possible. Provide this information to the DoD/DHS contact point for eligibility determination.

**APPENDIX A**

---

 **Chapter 1607 (REAP) DMDC Codes, Abbreviations and Acronyms**

| **Chapter 1607 VA-REAP Abbreviations & Acronyms** | | |
| --- | --- | --- |
| ABBREV or  ACRONYM | NAME | VALUES |
| USOC | Uniformed Service Organization Code | A = U.S. Army (USA)  N = U.S. Navy (USN)  M = U.S. Marine Corps (USMC)  F = U.S. Air Force (USAF)  C = U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) |
| USOCTC | Uniformed Service Organization Component Type Code | G = National Guard of the United States V = Reserve |
| SEX | SEX | M = Male  F = Female  Z = Unknown |
| ORCC | Original Reserve Component Category | I = IRR  S = Other Selected Reserve  A = AGR (Selected Reserve) |
| CAPI | Constructed Activation Period Indicator | Y = Yes (back to back activations combined into one >= 90 day period to establish eligibility)  N = No (no back to back activations combined to establish eligibility) |
| AED | Activation End Date | null (blank) = currently activated |
| AEN | Activation Event Number | This field is not used and will be deleted. |

 

| **CHAPTER 1607 VA-REAP TERMS AND DEFINITIONS** | | |
| --- | --- | --- |
| ELIGIBILITY    STATUS    CODES (See System Advisory dated 6/19/07) | MB | No Entitlement- Member erroneously reported as Eligible. |
| MC | No Entitlement- Member called or ordered to active-service in support of identified contingency or national emergency and served less than 90 days. |
| MA | Eligible- Member called or ordered to active-service in support of identified contingency or national emergency serving for 90 or more consecutive days. |
| BB | Eligible- Eligibility based on receipt of a LOD (Line of Duty) |
| EA | Eligible- 10 year eligibility based on Disability Separation from Ready Reserve. |
| DA | Eligibility Terminated- Member transferred/separated from Selected Reserve status and Original Reserve Component Category for Chapter 1607 eligibility was Selected Reserve. Terminate all Chapter 1607 "original Selected Reserve" segments. |
| DC | Eligibility Terminated- Termination of member's Chapter 1607 Eligibility because of receiving a Senior ROTC Scholarship under Section 2107 of 10 U.S.C. |
| DD | Eligibility Terminated- Member separated from Ready Reserve. |
| UNIFORMED  SERVICE  ORGANIZATION  CODE | A | U.S. ARMY(USA) |
| N | U.S. NAVY(USN) |
| M | U.S. MARINE CORPS(USMC) |
| F | U.S. AIR FORCE(USAF) |
| C | U.S. COAST GUARD(USCG) |
| UNIFORMED  SERVICE  ORGANIZATION  COMPONENT  TYPE CODE | G | NATIONAL GUARD OF THE UNITED STATES |
| V | RESERVE |
| ORIGINAL  RESERVE  COMPONENT  CATEGORY | I | IRR |
| S | Other Selected Reserve |
| A | AGR(Selected Reserve) |
| CONSTRUCTED  ACTIVATION  PERIOD  INDICATOR | Y | YES-(back to back activations combined into one >= 90 day period to establish eligibility) |
| N | NO-(no back to back activations combined to establish eligibility) |

**Appendix B VA REAP Website (Screen) Format**

---

**CHAPTER 1607 VA-REAP Eligibility Data**                                           

| NAME: | Veteran |
| --- | --- |
| SSN: | 000-00-0000 |
| FILE NUMBER: | 000-00-0000 |
| BIRTH DATE: | 0/0/1981 |
| GENDER: | M |

 

| Branch of Service | National  Guard or  Reserve | ORCC | CAPI | Activation  Begin Date | Activation  End  Date | Activation  Event  Number | Status  Code\* | Status Code  Effective Date |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| F | G | S | N | 10/1/2005 |  | 0 | MC | 10/1/2005 |
| F | G | S | N | 3/3/2003 | 9/1/2004 | 0 | MA | 5/31/2003 |

 

| ELIG REQUEST | PRINT | HELP |
| --- | --- | --- |

**(NOTE TO READER: The button options mean:**

ELIG REQUEST - This button will bring you back to the main screen in order to retrieve another record.  
PRINT - This button will allow you to print the screen.  
HELP - This button will provide all Codes, Abbreviations and Acronyms used in this record.)

 

| \*MB | No Entitlement- Member erroneously reported as Eligible. |
| --- | --- |
| \*MC | No Entitlement- Member called or ordered to active-service in support of identified contingency or national emergency and served less than 90 days. |
| \*MA | Eligible- Member called or ordered to active-service in support of identified contingency or national emergency serving for 90 or more consecutive days. |
| \*BB | Eligible- Eligibility based on receipt of a LOD (Line of Duty). |
| \*EA | Eligible- 10 year eligibility based on Disability Separation from Ready Reserve. |
| \*DA | Eligibility Terminated- Member transferred/separated from Selected Reserve status and Original Reserve Component Category for Chapter 1607 eligibility was Selected Reserve. Terminate all Chapter 1607 "original Selected Reserve" segments. Comment: Ignore instructions to "terminate segments." Pay chapter 1607 benefits through the effective of termination of Selected Reserve status. |
| \*DC | Eligibility Terminated- Termination of member's Chapter 1607 Eligibility because of receiving a Senior ROTC Scholarship under Section 2107 of 10 U.S.C. |
| \*DD | Eligibility Terminated- Member separated from Ready Reserve. |