# PART 1, GENERAL, CHAPTER 11, COMMITTEE ON WAIVERS AND COMPROMISES

**Part 1, Chapter 11, Committee on Waivers and Compromises**

**SUBCHAPTER I. GENERAL PRINCIPLES**

**1.01 Overview**

The Committee on Waivers and Compromises (COWC) was created when Congress provided in [**38 U.S.C. 5302**](#5302) that any beneficiary indebted to VA as the result of participation in a VA benefits program has the right to request a waiver of repayment of that debt. Debtors can also offer a compromise settlement on a debt based on [**31 U.S.C. 3711**](#3711) and [**38 U.S.C. 3720(a)**](#3720). In addition, the committee is authorized under [**5 U.S.C. 5584**](#5584) to consider waiver requests on erroneous payments of pay and allowances, including erroneous payments of travel, transportation and relocation expenses.

All directives and policies for waiver requests are issued from the Office of Financial Management (OFM).

The Education COWC is based in the Buffalo Regional Processing Office (RPO).

**NOTE**:  The waiver process is discussed in detail in [**Subchapter II: Waiver Process**](#Waiver_Process).

The guiding directives include:

1. [**M24-3, Chapter 8, Committee on Waivers and Compromises**](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001057/content/554400000198074/M24-3-Chapter-08-Committee-on-Waivers-and-Compromises)
2. [**M24-3, Chapter 8, Part 2, VBA Regional Offices**](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001057/content/554400000198074/M24-3-Chapter-08-Committee-on-Waivers-and-Compromises#_Toc101537447)
3. [**Volume XII, Debt Management**](https://department.va.gov/financial-policy-documents/financial-document/chapter-11-committee-on-waivers-and-compromises-cowc/)

* [**Chapter 10, Committee on Waivers and Compromises (COWC)**](https://department.va.gov/financial-policy-documents/financial-document/chapter-11-committee-on-waivers-and-compromises-cowc/)
* [**Chapter 11, Waiver Requests and Processing - COWC**](https://department.va.gov/financial-policy-documents/financial-document/chapter-11a-waiver-requests-and-processing-cowc/)
* [**Chapter 12, Compromise of Debt - COWC**](https://department.va.gov/financial-policy-documents/financial-document/chapter-12-compromise-of-debt-cowc/)
* [**Chapter 13, Evaluation Standards - COWC**](https://department.va.gov/financial-policy-documents/financial-document/chapter-13-evaluation-standards-cowc/)
* [**Chapter 14, Hearings - COWC**](https://department.va.gov/financial-policy-documents/financial-document/chapter-14-hearings-cowc/)
* [**Chapter 15, Appeals - COWC**](https://department.va.gov/financial-policy-documents/financial-document/chapter-15-appeals-cowc/)

4. [**Public Law 97-365, Debt Collection Act of 1982**](https://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/97/365.pdf)
5. [**Public Law 104-134, Debt Collection Improvement Act of 1996**](https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1996-10-21/pdf/96-26495.pdf)
6. [**5 U.S.C. 5584, Claims for overpayment of pay and allowances, and of travel, transportation, and relocation expenses and allowances**](https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title5-section5584&num=0&edition=prelim "5")
7. [**31 U.S.C. 3711, Collection and compromise**](https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USCODE-2023-title31/pdf/USCODE-2023-title31-subtitleIII-chap37-subchapII-sec3711.pdf)
8. [**38 U.S.C. 3720, Powers of Secretary**](https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=72(t)(2)(A)(iii)&f=treesort&num=60)
9. [**38 U.S.C. 5302, Waiver of recovery of claims by the United States**](https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section5302&num=0&edition=prelim)
10. [**38 C.F.R. 1.969, Revision of waiver decisions**](https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-38/chapter-I/part-1/subject-group-ECFRb1b535e6cffa220/section-1.969)
11. [**38 C.F.R. 21.9560, Entitlement charges – for provisions effective before August 1, 2011**](https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-38/chapter-I/part-21/subpart-P/subject-group-ECFR6f5ff5377583c4f/section-21.9560)
12. [**38 C.F.R. 1.955(e), Regional Office Committees on Waivers and Compromises Committee Composition**](https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-38/chapter-I/part-1/subject-group-ECFRb1b535e6cffa220/section-1.955)

**1.02 Committee on Waivers and Compromises**

The COWC is a decision-making panel comprised of one or more persons who make decisions on waiver requests, conduct hearings when requested, and consider disputes and disagreements.

**1.03 Waiver Request**

A waiver request is normally initiated by the beneficiary but can also be initiated by an interested third party on his or her behalf (such as the Finance Officer). A request for a waiver or compromise can be made on any type of correspondence. 

**1.04 Time Limit**

The time limit for a waiver request is normally one (1) year from the date Debt Management Center (DMC) notifies the beneficiary of the debt, or within such longer period as VA determines is reasonable in a case in which the beneficiary demonstrates to the satisfaction of the VA that such notification was not actually received within a reasonable period after such date. This date is found on the specific Notice of Indebtedness (NOI) at [**https://www.va.gov/manage-va-debt/#request-financial-help-or-disp**](https://www.va.gov/manage-va-debt/#request-financial-help-or-disp).

There is no time limit in which the beneficiary needs to make a request for a compromise offer. 

Schools are not entitled to receive waivers or compromises. If one is received, DMC will inform them they do not have waiver rights.

**1.05 Waiver Workload Systems**

There are three systems used to track waiver and compromises workload.

1. **Veteran Account Management System (VAMS).** Document repository which houses waiver documents received by DMC.
2. **SalesForce COWC Log**. Controls waivers referred by DMC.
3. **The Image Management System (TIMS)**. Stores all education documents, including those related to the waiver requested (i.e. beneficiary electronic folder).

**1.06 DMC Actions**

Once DMC receives a waiver request, they will

1. Generate a VAMS case file, Referral of Indebtedness and Waiver package.
2. Upload all essential documents to VAMS.
3. Create a record in SalesForce COWC Log.
4. Perform a Stop collection action in Enterprise Management of Payments, Workload, and Reporting (eMPWR), Benefits Delivery Network (BDN), and/or Financial Accounting System (FAS) (as appropriate).
5. Prepare decision letter and process appropriate transactions in eMPWR, BDN, and/or FAS (as appropriate) if the full waiver is granted.

**1.07 COWC Actions**

1. Generate a daily Aged Active Report in SalesForce to identify waiver requests received from DMC.
2. Distribute new waiver requests to committee members based on the order they are received.
3. Committee members will

* Capture all supporting waiver request documents from VAMS into the appropriate TIMS claim folder.
* Review and process each assigned waiver request.

**NOTE**: Committee members may not consider the waiver of a debt that they created.  In this instance, they must refer the waiver request to the committee supervisor.

* Develop for a [**VA Form 5655, Financial Status Report (FSR)**](https://gcc02.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fvaww.va.gov%2Fvaforms%2Fva%2Fpdf%2FVA5655.pdf&data=05%7C02%7C%7C11d8b23214c54948065908ddacdc8ba1%7Ce95f1b23abaf45ee821db7ab251ab3bf%7C0%7C0%7C638856785420011333%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJFbXB0eU1hcGkiOnRydWUsIlYiOiIwLjAuMDAwMCIsIlAiOiJXaW4zMiIsIkFOIjoiTWFpbCIsIldUIjoyfQ%3D%3D%7C0%7C%7C%7C&sdata=sFWsJNPtZibmMEVWbtapAO29p304fkSS2Uu%2BB41OG5k%3D&reserved=0), if a review determines the submitted FSR contains inaccurate information to justify or support a waiver request (i.e., purposely inaccurate) or the FSR is incomplete (unsigned or undated).  Suspend the claim for 30 days pending receipt of the new document.  If a new FSR is not received after 30 days, a decision will be made without using financial hardship as a determining factor.

* Document the decision on the [**VA Form 1837, Decision on Waiver of Indebtedness**](https://vaww.va.gov/vaforms/download.asp?id=3915). Once completed, this form will be sent to DMC using VAMS with a copy captured into TIMS.

**NOTE**: VA Form 1837 should never be sent to the beneficiary.

* Generate a decision letter, if the decision is granted in part or denied, capture into TIMS, and release to the beneficiary. If there is no additional adjudicative action necessary, close the TIMS folder.

* Following the decision, close the case in SalesForce and upload VA Form 4-1837 into VAMS for return to DMC.
* Take appropriate work credit based on waiver role, first reviewer or authorizer.

**NOTE**: The appropriate work credit should be cleared by the Committee member who is closing the case in SalesForce; in BDN, the correct EP would be 402. In instances when a second authorizer is required for the waiver decision, the first reviewer is authorized individual work credit; in BDN, the correct EP would be 408.

**1.08 Appeal Process**

The COWC appeal process differs from other education appeal paths described in [**M22-4, Part 3, Chapter 2, Subchapter 1**](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073501/Part-3-Chapter-2-Administrative-Procedures#204).

1. Beneficiary has the right to appeal a waiver denial or a partial denial.
2. Beneficiary may appeal the COWC’s denial of the waiver request due to timeliness.
3. A “Notice of Right to Appeal” is attached with each decision letter and provides two options from which the beneficiary can choose if they wish to appeal. Beneficiaries may

* Ask for a reconsideration. This reconsideration will be conducted by another member of the COWC who did not decide the original request.
* Submit a request for appeal directly to the Board of Veterans’ Appeals (BVA).

**NOTE**: There is no provision to request a Higher-Level Review (HLR) on waiver decisions.

**1.09 Board of Veterans’ Appeals (BVA)**

1. COWC appeals heard by the BVA are virtual. It is not necessary for the beneficiary to travel to speak with a Veterans Law Judge. They can join a virtual hearing from any location with a strong internet connection using a computer, tablet, or smartphone with a camera and microphone.  Family members or caregivers may attend the virtual hearing.
2. Accredited representatives, like a VSO, may help the beneficiary prepare for the virtual hearing. They can also join the virtual hearing and help present information to the judge. The beneficiary and accredited representative can join the virtual hearing from separate locations or join together from the same location.
3. The decision on an appeal filed by or on behalf of a beneficiary will be stamped with the date of mailing on the face of the decision and is final on such date. The beneficiary and their representative, if any, will be provided with copies of the decision.

**NOTE**: A dismissal without prejudice is not normally considered a final BVA decision.

**1.10 Remand for Correction of Error by BVA**

1. Unless the issue or issues can be granted in full, BVA will remand the appeal to COWC for correction of the error(s) on the part of the VA to satisfy its duties under 38 U.S.C. 5103A, if the error occurred prior to the date of the COWC decision on appeal. BVA may remand for correction of any other error by COWC in satisfying a regulatory or statutory duty, if correction of the error would have a reasonable possibility of aiding in substantiating the beneficiary’s claim.
2. The content of the BVA's remand will be limited to information that directly affects the issues involved in the contested claim, including the action(s) to be taken by COWC. Appellate issues that do not involve all of the contesting parties will be addressed in one or more separate written decisions, remands, or orders that will be furnished only to the beneficiary concerned and their representatives if any.
3. After correction of any error identified in the BVA's remand, COWC will readjudicate the claim and provide notice of the decision under 38 U.S.C. 5104, to include notice under 38 U.S.C. 5104C of the beneficiary’s options for further review of the COWC decision. COWC will provide for the expeditious treatment of any claim that is remanded by the BVA.

[**Go to Top**](#Top)

**SUBCHAPTER II: WAIVER PROCESS**

**1.11 Automatic Denials**

Committee members must first consider if bad faith, fraud, and/or misrepresentation have occurred ([**38 U.S.C. 5302(c)**](https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section5302&num=0&edition=prelim)). A waiver cannot be granted when the possibility of fraud, misrepresentation, and/or bad faith exist.

**NOTE**: Committee members cannot determine fraud or misrepresentation. These cases must be sent to Regional Counsel for review and possible prosecution. Department of Justice (DOJ) retains sole authority to terminate collection action regarding debts and claims involving fraud, misrepresentation, false claim, or mutual mistake of fact. Waivers cannot be denied for fraud unless convicted in court. Follow local RPO guidance if either fraud or misrepresentation is suspected.

**1.12 Elements to Consider on Waiver Decisions**

1. **Bad Faith**. This is the deceptive dealing to seek to gain something at the government’s expense. Examples include (but not limited):

(1)  Inaccurate information provided to justify or support a waiver request, such as a purposely inaccurate [**VA Form 5655**](https://vaww.va.gov/vaforms/va/pdf/VA5655.pdf), Financial Status Report (FSR).

(2)  Falsely certified school attendance

(3)  Beneficiary received and kept funds knowing they had reduced or withdrew from the term.

(4)  Beneficiary already had prior waivers granted for same issue.

(5)  Beneficiary had prior notification explaining benefits cannot be paid for dropped classes.

2. **Equity and Good Conscience**. Committee members must review waiver requests and consider fairness, right vs. wrong, and justness and morality. There are five elements which must be considered under Equity and Good Conscience.

(1)  Fault. Committee members must consider:

* Extent to which the beneficiary’s action or inaction caused VA to make an erroneous payment, and the extent to which it makes this action or inaction excusable.
* If the beneficiary was at fault because he/she negotiated payment when they reasonably should have known the payment represented an erroneous payment.
* Any factual circumstances which existed at the time, which may include the beneficiary’s background, education level, employment, or physical/mental condition.

**NOTE**: Fault can exist without willful intent to deceive or defraud.

(2)  Unjust enrichment. Under most circumstances it may not be equitable for the beneficiary to retain money that has been erroneously provided, especially if the school refunded tuition and/or fee payments to them. Failure to make restitution would result in an unfair gain to the beneficiary. Under such circumstances, a duty is imposed upon the beneficiary to repay the government to prevent such unjust enrichment.

(3)  Undue financial hardship. Committee members must consider if collection of the debt will seriously impair his or her ability to provide their family with the necessary basic subsistence expenses. Committee members should also consider all available income from spouses or children when making this determination.

(4)  Defeat purpose of benefit. Committee members must remember the purpose of education benefits is to assist beneficiaries in completing their education goals. When considering this element in the waiver decision process, they must consider:

* Will the debt collection prevent the beneficiary from attending school?
* Has the beneficiary used VA benefits and other income wisely?
* Will the collection of the debt keep the beneficiary from meeting basic expenses?

(5)  Changed Position. This can be defined as a detriment to the beneficiary which may exist because of an overpayment he/she thought was proper. 

**Example**: The beneficiary reasonably believed the number of class sessions attended per week was sufficient to be considered full time, because the course was approved by the State Approving Agency (SAA) and certified by the school. However, upon further review, it was revealed there was insufficient contact time and the class should NOT have been certified for the number of credit hours it had been. 

3. **Expenses and Income**. Review and analyze the beneficiary’s entire [**VA Form 5655**](https://vaww.va.gov/vaforms/va/pdf/VA5655.pdf), including both expenses and income. Careful consideration should be given to basic living expenses. VA debts should be given the same consideration as other debts, including consumer debts.

**1.13. Waiver Decision**

After reviewing the request, considering all of the elements to include the financial status report, the committee member must make the waiver decision. As stated previously, the waiver decision must be completed on [**VA Form 1837**](https://vaww.va.gov/vaforms/va/pdf/VA1837.pdf), Decision on Waiver of Indebtedness. The committee member’s consideration of each element must be addressed on this form and must support the final decision. 

1. **Partial Grant**. If unable to grant a full waiver decision, consider a partial waiver. Granting a partial waiver is due to the varying degrees of fault or combinations of the elements. Reasons to grant a partial waiver may include:

* Portion of the request was untimely (untimely portion is being denied but there is a reason to grant timely debts)
* DMC approved an 06B refund (06B refunds are not eligible for waiver consideration)
* DMC combined debts from more than one term

**Example**:   Beneficiary did not attend one term but kept money for the term.  They then withdrew from subsequent term(s) non-punitive with an acceptable explanation/reason to grant a waiver.  COWC will deny the debts associated with the term they did not attend but will grant a waiver for the other terms.

2. **Beneficiary Notification**. Committee members must furnish the beneficiary with notification of the decision EXCEPT when a full grant is decided. DMC will notify the beneficiary when there is a full grant of the waiver.

Committee members should never release a copy of the VA Form 1837 to the beneficiary. This document is used for internal use only. Decision letters are available in the Personal Computer Generated Letter (PCGL) library for COWC use. These letters should be dated and released within five (5) business days of the decision. 

3. **Charge of Entitlement**. When a full or partial waiver request is granted, entitlement is charged for the amount granted. Charged entitlement and “waiver granted” decision must be documented in a FLASH in TIMS. Committee members must update the appropriate system (DGI, Benefits Manager (BM), BDN, etc.) to adjust the entitlement and issue an updated Certificate of Eligibility (CoE) showing the new remaining entitlement.
4. **Requirement for Second Signature**. Any decision granting a waiver totaling $20,000 or more requires a second signature for approval.

**1.14 Miscellaneous**

BDN code/class entries which may be found on waiver requests:

1. Chapter 33 debts

* 71B debts associated with books/supplies payments or other lump-sum payments to the beneficiary other than chapter 30 or chapter 1606 kickers. Supporting document codes include 11 through 15, 27, and 28.
* 72B debts associated with housing payments which may include chapter 33 kickers and/or chapter 33 supplemental assistance. Supporting document codes include 16 through 20 and 48 through 51.
* 73B debts associated with chapter 30 and/or chapter 1606 kickers paid under chapter 33. Supporting document codes include 76 through 79.
* 74B debts associated with payments made to the school (including Yellow Ribbon) but are charged to the student when the student attended any portion of the enrollment. Supporting document codes include 52, 62, 80, and 86 through 90.
* 75B debts associated with payments made to the school (including Yellow Ribbon) and charged to the school.  Supporting document codes include 63 and 91 through 98.

2. Non-chapter 33 debts

* 41B debts are under chapter 34.
* 44B debts are under chapter 35.
* 54B debts are under chapter 1607.
* 56B debts are under chapter 1606.
* 59B debts are under chapter 30.

**1.15 Reporting**

1. **Weekly Reporting**.  Each Monday the Buffalo RPO will report the number of cases pending as part of weekly inventory reporting.
2. **COIN 90 Report**

* Monthly report prepared by DMC, sent to the COWC, with a courtesy copy to OFM (VAVBAWAS/CO/241C/COWC <[**COWC.VBACO@va.gov**](mailto:COWC.VBACO@va.gov)>). This report includes:
  + Unresolved waiver requests greater than 120 days old (based on date received by DMC).
  + Status of granted, denied, not received, and rejected/returned to DMC waivers.
  + Status of granted, denied, not received, and rejected/returned to DMC notices of disagreement.
  + Status of granted, denied, not received, and rejected/returned to DMC reconsiderations.
* COWC will review each unresolved waiver request and either annotate the resolution or provide a detail description regarding the reason the waiver has not been decided. The COWC has two weeks from the date DMC sends the report to respond, and will also provide a copy to OFM.
* OFM will review the COWC’s response and submit a monthly memorandum to each COWC Regional Office Director reporting any incomplete or unsatisfactory responses. OFM will provide a courtesy copy to the Executive Management Team (VAVBAWAS/CO/EDUCATION SERVICE EXECUTIVE MANAGEMENT <[**EDUSERVEXMGMT.VBACO@va.gov**](mailto:EDUSERVEXMGMT.VBACO@va.gov)>) in Education Service.

[**Go to Top**](#Top)