# Part 3: Chapter 11 - Section 901

**Part 3: Chapter 11 - Section 901**

**[Subchapter 1.](#SI) Eligibility and Entitlement**  
[11.01 General](#1101)  
[11.02 Eligibility](#1102)  
[11.03 Character of Discharge](#1103)  
[11.04 Delimiting Date](#1104)  
[11.05 Determining Entitlement](#1105)  
[11.06 Rates for Section 901 Allowances](#1106)  
[11.07 Limitation on Assistance Under Two or More Programs](#1107)  
[11.08 Lump-Sum Cash Out Payment](#1108)  
[11.09 Applications and Other Forms](#1109)  
[11.10 Courses and Benefits](#1110)   
[11.11 Requirements of Current VA Educational Programs Not Applicable to Section 901](#1111)  
[11.12 Accredited Institutions](#1112)  
  
**[Subchapter 2.](#SII) Inquiry, Award, and Disallowance Processing**  
[11.13 Delegation of Authority for Section 901 Claims](#1113)  
[11.14 Inquiries](#1114)  
[11.15 Disallowances](#1115)  
[11.16 Appeals](#1116)   
[11.17 Awards](#1117)  
[11.18 Award Considerations](#1118)  
[11.19 Notification of Award Action](#1119)  
[11.20 End Products](#1120)   
[11.21 Disposition of Awards](#1121)  
[11.22 Change of Status](#1122)  
  
**[Subchapter 3.](#SIII) Dependency and Entitlement Transfer**  
[11.23 Establishment of Dependency](#1123)  
[11.24 Transfer of Entitlement](#1124)  
[11.25 Transfer of Entitlement Upon the Death of a Serviceperson or Veteran](#1125)   
[11.26 Election to Transfer Entitlement](#1126)  
[11.27 Revocation of Election](#1127)  
  
**Figures**  
[11.01 M30 [BDN] Screen Display](#f1101)  
[11.02 Letter Verifying Section 901 Eligibility (Two-Way Letter)](#f1102)   
[11.03 Entitlement Computation Table for Section 901](#F1103)  
[11.04 Representation of Enrollment Certification (VA Form 22-1999)](#F1104)  
  
**Appendix A - Section 901 Rates Tables**  
[11.01 Section 901 Rates](#AppendixA)

 

**SUBCHAPTER I.  ELIGIBILITY AND ENTITLEMENT**

**11.01  GENERAL**

---

This chapter provides instructions for determining eligibility and processing claims under the Educational Assistance Test Program, [chapter 107 of title 10, U. S. Code](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title10/subtitleA/part3/chapter107&edition=prelim).  [Section 901 of Public Law 96-342](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf), which was enacted on September 8, 1980, created this educational benefit program.  The title "[section 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf)" has been used to identify the program since its inception.  However, the title "chapter 107" may also be used.  Throughout this manual, the Educational Assistance Test Program is referred to as section 901.

The Waco Regional Office will process all applications and inquiries, and authorize all awards under [section 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf).  [The VSC (Veterans Service Center) and the Finance activity] at the Waco Regional Office will prepare all transactions for entry on a personal computer application.  (See [subpar. b](#1101b) below.) (See [RPO Letter 22-05-22](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000097550?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) )

*NOTE:  The processing instructions in this chapter are for the Waco Regional Office only.  However, personnel at all regional offices should become familiar with eligibility criteria (see [par. 11.02)](#1102), the limitation on assistance under two or more programs (see [par. 11.07)](#1107), and inquiries (see [par. 11.14).](#1114)*

**a.  [Veterans Service Center] and Finance Activity Responsibilities**

(1)  The [VSC] has the responsibility for the following:

(i)  Determining eligibility and original entitlement;

(ii)  Developing claims;

(iii)  Preparing award and disallowance code sheets; and

(iv)  Issuing award letters.

*NOTE:  The personal computer program has been designed to generate award letters based on Finance input (see subpar. b below).  In the event that the system cannot generate a letter, [the VSC must prepare an appropriate dictated or form letter.  VSC] is responsible for insuring that all award letters are appropriate for the situation, grammatically correct, and completely informative.*

(2)  The Finance activity is responsible for the following:

(i)  Entering data into the personal computer;

(ii)  Issuing benefits due and payable;

(iii)  Maintaining detailed records on entitlement used (assistance and subsistence);

(iv)  Creating accounts receivable; and

(v)  Issuing any necessary collection letters.

**b.  Program Automation**

(1)  The M30 [BDN (Benefit Delivery Network)] screen, Educational Assistance Test Program Benefit [PL 96-342 Section 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf), displays eligibility data for section 901.  DOD (Department of Defense) supplies that data for entry on [BDN].  VA personnel may access the M30 screen through the MINQ (Master Record Inquiry) command.  (See [Part 2: Chapter 3 - Master Record Inquiry (Overview and [Chs. 32, 34, 35 and Secs. 901, AND 903])](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000075787?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) )

*NOTE:  In some cases, the M30 screen may not exist or may show a positive entry in the NOT ELIGIBLE field.  If the M30 [BDN screen (see [fig. 11.01)](#f1101) is incorrect, or does not exist, VSC should contact the appropriate service department upon receipt of an application.  A list of the service department contact points is maintained by Central Office Education Service.  (See* [Part 5: Chapter 8 - Miscellaneous](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000076326?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)*paragraph 8.09d.)  VSC] will process a two-way memorandum (see [fig. 11.02)](#f1102) to the appropriate component at DOD requesting certification of eligibility for [section 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf).  Upon receipt, DOD will enter the necessary certification and return the memorandum to VA.  In the absence of a correct M30 screen, VA may accept a certified statement of eligibility from a service department official.*

(2)  The Finance activity at the Waco Regional Office will process all [section 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf) payments using the personal computer program.  This program is capable of the following functions:

(i)  Processing payments for either subsistence, assistance, or both;

(ii)  Crediting, debiting, and transferring entitlement;

(iii)  Generating letters for various award transactions (see subpar. a above regarding the use of alternate means of letter production); and

(iv)  Generating reports based on data contained in individual records.

**11.02  ELIGIBILITY**

---

**a.  Eligibility Requirements.**  Basic eligibility to [section 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf) benefits is limited to servicepersons and veterans who have met the requirements described below:

(1)  The individual enlisted or reenlisted for service on active duty in the Army, Navy, Air Force, or Marine Corps between September 30, 1980, and October 1, 1981.  If the individual enlisted under a delayed entry agreement after September 30, 1980, and before October 1, 1981, he or she must have entered on active duty before October 1, 1982.

*NOTE:  An enlistment or reenlistment under the conditions shown in [subparagraph a(1)](#1102a1) is referred to as a qualifying enlistment.  The period of service based on such an enlistment is referred to as a qualifying period of service.*

(2)  The individual is a secondary school graduate.

**Figure 11.01 - M30 [BDN] Screen Display**

*[NOTE:  The telephone number on this screen is not correct.  The correct number is (254) 299-9378.]*

(3)  Upon enlistment or reenlistment, the individual met all other entry requirements set by the Secretary of Defense for the purpose of this program.  Examples of additional DOD requirements are as follows:  enlistment in a particular Military Occupational Specialty; and achievement of a certain score on the Armed Forces Qualifications Test.

(4)  The individual was discharged from his or her qualifying period of service under honorable conditions (see [par. 11.03](#1103) below).

(5)  The individual completed at least 24 months (2 years) of continuous active duty of the qualifying enlistment or reenlistment, or the individual completed the full period of service required under his or her qualifying enlistment contract.

Department of Veterans Affairs

Veterans Benefits Administration  
701 Clay Avenue  
Waco, TX  76799

                                                                                              In Reply Refer To:         349/21

SUBJECT:  Application for Educational Assistance Under [Section 901, PL 96-342](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf)

1.  The Department of Veterans Affairs has received an application for educational assistance under [Section 901 of Public Law 96-342](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf), the Department of Defense Authorization Act of 1981 for the person named below.

2.  Please certify at the bottom of this letter whether or not the person

(a)  is a participant in the program, and, if so,  
(b)  meets the service department requirements to receive benefits under the program.

3.  Please return this letter to:

Department of Veterans Affairs  
Regional Office (349/21)  
701 Clay Avenue  
Waco, TX  76799

4.  Thank you for your assistance.

[Veterans Service Center Manager]

Name   Social Security No.  EOD  RAD  Section Applied For  Proof of Participation

**Figure 11.02 - Letter Verifying [Section 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf) Eligibility (Two-Way Letter)**

**b.  Exceptions to Length of Service Requirement.**  If the individual's active duty did not meet the length of service requirement (see [subpar. a(5)](#1102a5) above), he or she may qualify for benefits under one of the exceptions shown below.

(1)  If the enlistment between September 30, 1980, and October 1, 1981, was the person's initial enlistment, that person will be eligible if he or she had a qualifying discharge or if he or she has a service-connected disability for which compensation is payable.  The qualifying discharges included under this exception are:

(i)  An early-out discharge, under [10 U.S.C. 1171;](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:1171 edition:prelim))

(ii)  A hardship discharge, under [10 U.S.C. 1173;](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:1173 edition:prelim)) and

(iii)  A discharge for a disability incurred or aggravated in line of duty.

(2)  If the individual entered on active duty after October 16, 1981, that person may be eligible if he or she had a previous period of service.  The previous active service must have been at least 24 continuous months, unless the individual had an early-out discharge, under [10 U.S.C. 1171.](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:1171 edition:prelim))  [  ]

**11.03  CHARACTER OF DISCHARGE**

---

**a.**  Under [10 U.S.C. 2142(a)(3)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:2142 edition:prelim)), an individual who is discharged or otherwise released from active duty under other than honorable conditions is not entitled to educational assistance under section 901.  For VA purposes, if the veteran received a general discharge or higher, he or she would be entitled to section 901 benefits.  [If the discharge was not under conditions other than dishonorable], the veteran would not be eligible.

**b.**  Eligibility may be established based on an upgraded or corrected discharge.  However, section 901 does not allow an extension to the delimiting date due to an upgraded or corrected discharge (see [par. 11.04](#1104) below).  If a veteran establishes eligibility based on an upgraded or corrected discharge, benefits are payable from the date of the upgrade or correction until the delimiting date based on the actual discharge.

EXAMPLE:  A female veteran received a discharge on January 21, 1984, which was under other than honorable conditions (i.e. below general).  The veteran filed a claim with VA for section 901 benefits immediately after her discharge.  The claim was disallowed based on the character of discharge.  The military upgraded the discharge to general effective December 12, 1990.  On January 1, 1991, the veteran reopened her claim for section 901 benefits.  She is eligible to receive section 901 benefits during the period December 12, 1990, to January 21, 1994.

**11.04  DELIMITING DATE**

---

**a.  Delimiting Date - Veterans.**  The veteran's entitlement to section 901 benefits expires 10 years from the date of his or her retirement, or last discharge or separation from active duty.  Compute the delimiting date by adding 10 years and 1 day to the RAD (release from active duty) date.  Delimiting date extensions, other than for a later period of active duty, are not permitted under section 901.  (See [Part 3: Chapter 4 - Delimiting Date Extensions](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073604?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) paragraph 4.02 regarding the establishment of a delimiting date based on a subsequent period of service.) 

**b.  Delimiting Date - Dependents and Survivors.**  See [paragraphs 11.24f](#1124f) and [11.25b.](#1125b)

**11.05  DETERMINING ENTITLEMENT**

---

**a.  Calculating Entitlement.**  Eligible veterans and servicepersons are entitled to 1 standard academic year (9 months of entitlement) for each year of their qualifying enlistment.  The maximum is 4 standard academic years or 36 months of entitlement.  Calculate entitlement as follows:

(1)  Determine the number of years, months, and days in the individual's qualifying period of service.  This can be done by subtracting the current or computed EOD (entry on duty) date from the RAD date.  Increase the RAD by 1 day to account for inclusive days.  Exclude from the calculation any deductible time under [38 CFR 3.15](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=7d0dfee113e1a8ddfaedd92cd7a919fb&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.1.3_115) (during the qualifying period of service).

(2)  Round the number of days to the nearest whole month (i.e., drop 14 days or less and add 1 month for 15 days or more).

(3)  Convert years and months of service to total months.

(4)  Convert the number of months of service to months and days of entitlement using the chart in [figure 11.03](#F1103).

EXAMPLE:  A female veteran has met all the requirements establishing her entitlement to 901 benefits.  Her EOD date was December 3, 1980, and her RAD date was February 5, 1983.  The character of discharge was honorable.  [She has 23 days deductible time (Not-on-Duty) time under [`](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=7d0dfee113e1a8ddfaedd92cd7a919fb&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.1.3_115)

NOTE:  In this example, after adding one day to the RAD date, you could use either of the following

YR.      MO.     DAY                                    YR.      MO.     DAY

83        02        06                   **or**                 82        13        36

YR.      MO.     DAY

1.  RAD (add 1 day)                                82        13        36

2.  EOD                                                   80        12        03

3.  Deductible Time                                00        00        23

4.  Adjusted Entry Date                          80        12        26

(Add lines 2 and 3)

5.  Net Creditable Service                     **02        01        10**

(Subtract line 4 from line 1)

6.  Round the number of days in line 5 to the nearest whole month

(i.e., drop 14 days or less and add 1 month if 15 days or more).

**2 years, 1 month, and 10 days = 2 years and 1 month**

7.  Convert the years and months in line 6 to total months.

**2 years and 1 month = 25 months of service**

8.  Convert the net creditable service in line 7 to months and days of entitlement by using the chart in [figure 11.03](#F1103).

**25 months of service = 18 Months and 23 days of entitlement**

*NOTE:  Deductible time is not included as qualifying service to meet the 24 month requirement; however, it [does not break the continuity of service.]*

**b.  Charging Entitlement (Assistance and Subsistence)**

(1)  The personal computer system is programmed to charge entitlement on an elapsed-time basis using 30-day months (e.g., January, February, March, and April all have 30 days).  Finance will insure that entitlement has been charged in this manner based on payments issued. 

(2)  [VSC] should prepare each award based on the information on the enrollment certification without regard to the amount of entitlement remaining.  Finance will insure that the system properly terminates payment on the date entitlement is exhausted. 

EXCEPTION:  If the record shows that entitlement is exhausted, [VSC] will disallow the claim.

(3)  The charge against assistance allowance should always equal the charge against subsistence allowance for the same enrollment period (see [38 CFR 21.5744(a)(3))](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=7d0dfee113e1a8ddfaedd92cd7a919fb&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15744).  For example, when a serviceperson receives only assistance allowance for an enrollment, entitlement will be charged as if he or she had received assistance and subsistence allowance.

**11.06  RATES FOR SECTION 901 ALLOWANCES**

---

**a.  Assistance Allowance.**  Effective October 1, [of each year], the total assistance allowance payable for an academic year may not exceed [a specific amount].  VA issues payment as a lump sum at the end of the first month in which training begins, or as soon as possible after that date.  [(The section 901 rates are shown in [appendix A.](#AppendixA))]  Assistance allowance covers educational expenses (e.g., tuition and fees, books, lab, or shop equipment) for instruction received at an accredited institution (see [par. 11.18c)](#1118c).  The amount of tuition and fees is certified by the appropriate school official.  The amount of other educational expenses is certified by the student.

**b.  Subsistence Allowance.**  Effective October 1, [of each year], the monthly rate of subsistence allowance for full-time training is [changed to a specific amount.  [Appendix A](#AppendixA) shows the monthly rate for part-time training.  VA issues payment on a monthly basis during the enrollment period based on the rate of the veteran's training (i.e., full time or part time).  (See [appendix A](#AppendixA)].)

*NOTE:  A serviceperson or the dependent of a serviceperson is not eligible to receive subsistence allowance.  (See [par. 11.05b(3)](#1105b3) above regarding the entitlement charge for subsistence and assistance.)*

| **No. Mos. Service** | **Entitlement** | | **No. Mos. Service** | **Entitlement** | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
Subsitence Allowance

|  | **Mos.** | **Days** |  | **Mos.** | **Days** |
| **1** | 00 | 23 | **25** | 18 | 23 |
| **2** | 01 | 15 | **26** | 19 | 15 |
| **3** | 02 | 07 | **27** | 20 | 07 |
| **4** | 03 | 00 | **28** | 21 | 00 |
| **5** | 03 | 23 | **29** | 21 | 23 |
| **6** | 04 | 15 | **30** | 22 | 15 |
| **7** | 05 | 07 | **31** | 23 | 07 |
| **8** | 06 | 00 | **32** | 24 | 00 |
| **9** | 06 | 23 | **33** | 24 | 23 |
| **10** | 07 | 15 | **34** | 25 | 15 |
| **11** | 08 | 07 | **35** | 26 | 07 |
| **12** | 09 | 00 | **36** | 27 | 00 |
| **13** | 09 | 23 | **37** | 27 | 23 |
| **14** | 10 | 15 | **38** | 28 | 15 |
| **15** | 11 | 07 | **39** | 29 | 07 |
| **16** | 12 | 00 | **40** | 30 | 00 |
| **17** | 12 | 23 | **41** | 30 | 23 |
| **18** | 13 | 15 | **42** | 31 | 15 |
| **19** | 14 | 07 | **43** | 32 | 07 |
| **20** | 15 | 00 | **44** | 33 | 00 |
| **21** | 15 | 23 | **45** | 33 | 23 |
| **22** | 16 | 15 | **46** | 34 | 15 |
| **23** | 17 | 07 | **47** | 35 | 07 |
| **24** | 18 | 00 | **48 or more** | 36 | 00 |

**Figure 11.03.  Entitlement Computation Table for Section 901**

*NOTE:  This chart is used for converting the claimant's entitlement to benefits by taking the number of his/her months of active duty service and multiplying that number by .75.  This is done because a standard academic year is approximately 9 months (or .75) of a calendar year.  (See [par. 11.18b(1).](#1118b1))*

**11.07  LIMITATION ON ASSISTANCE UNDER TWO OR MORE PROGRAMS**

---

The maximum entitlement under section 901 and any combination of VA programs cannot exceed 48 months.  This requirement applies to section 901 and the following VA education programs:

[a.]  Chapters 32, 34, 35, and 36 of title 38, U. S. Code (also the former chapter 33 of title 38, U. S. Code);   

[b.]  Section 903 of the Department of Defense Authorization Act, 1981 ([Public Law 96-342](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf));   

[c.]  The Omnibus Diplomatic Security and Antiterrorism Act of 1986 ([Public Law 93-399](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/93/397.pdf) and [Executive Order 12598](https://www.archives.gov/federal-register/codification/executive-order/12598.html)) which replaced the [Hostage Relief Act of 1980](https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/STATUTE-94/pdf/STATUTE-94-Pg1967.pdf);

[d.]  Chapter 30 of title 38, U. S. Code; and

[e.  Chapter 1606, formerly chapter 106, of title 10, U. S. Code.]

**11.08  LUMP-SUM CASH OUT PAYMENT**

---

A serviceperson who is receiving (or has received) section 901 benefits may request a lump-sum cash out payment in lieu of further benefits.  The individual may receive such a payment only while on active duty, and only after having reenlisted after completion of his or her qualifying enlistment.  The appropriate service department is responsible for making lump-sum payments and for notifying VA of such payments.  Upon receipt of notice from DOD, [VSC] will take action to terminate benefits as provided in paragraph [11.18(f)(2)](#1118f2) below.  [VSC] should clearly annotate the claims folder to show when the lump-sum payment occurs.  This will alert other [VSC] and Finance personnel that no subsequent VA payments should be issued.

**11.09  APPLICATIONS AND OTHER FORMS**

---

**a.  Application.**  VA Form 22-8889, Application for Educational Assistance Test Program Benefits, is the form applicable for the section 901 program.

(1)  Veterans, eligible dependents, and servicepersons should use the form when applying for benefits.

*NOTE:  A dependent applying based on an entitlement transfer should also file a statement of election properly signed by the serviceperson or veteran (see [par. 11.25](#1125)).*

(2)  The application does not include an enrollment certification as part of the form.  VA must receive a VA Form 22-1999, Enrollment Certification, from the school before awarding benefits (see [fig. [11.04)].](#F1104)

**b.  Pattern Letters.**  The Waco Regional Office is authorized to establish local pattern and award letters as necessary.  Copies of such letters should be furnished to the Education Service, Procedures Staff (224B), in VA Central Office.  Copies of letters will be disposed of in accordance with RCS VB-1, part II, item 1-6.1.  (See NOTE to [par. 11.01a r](#1101a)egarding the manner for production of award letters.)

**c.  VA Forms for Use.**  A limited number of the current VA forms will be used as needed.  Forms should be clearly annotated to identify the claim for section 901 benefits.  The following forms may be used:

(1)  VA Form 22-1992, Authorization for Certificate of Eligibility or Disallowance;

(2)  VA Form 22-1997, Education Award;

(3)  VA Form [22-8046], Payment Notice (Stop-Suspend-Resume);

| [**Department of Veterans Affairs** | | | **ENROLLMENT CERTIFICATION** | | | | | | | | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
Representation of Enrollment Certification (VA Form 22-1999)

| 1.  Name | | | | | | | 2.  VA File Number | | | | | |
| 3.  Address | | | | | | | 4.  Student's Social Security Number | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | |  | | | | | |
| 5.  TYPE OF TRAINING  IHL         NCD    COOP     FLIGHT | | | | | | | | 6.  Name of Program | | | | |
| CORR      OJT/APP      GRADUATE | | | | | | | | 7.  Credit for Previous Training | | | | |
| ENROLLMENT DATA | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| 8.  ENROLLMENT  EFFECTIVE DATES | | 9.  CREDIT HOUR COURSES | | | | | | 10.  CLOCK HOUR COURSES | 11 CHARGES FOR PERIODS OF INSTRUCTIONS | | | 12.  TRAINING TIME  (Graduate |
| A.  BEGIN | B.  END | A. In Residence hours | | B.  Remedial Deficiency hours | | C.  Open Circuit Hours | | HOURS | Tuition & Fees | | | or Advanced Professional Program) |
|  |  |  | |  | |  | |  |  | | |  |
|  |  |  | |  | |  | |  |  | | |  |
|  |  |  | |  | |  | |  |  | | |  |
|  |  |  | |  | |  | |  |  | | |  |
|  |  |  | |  | |  | |  |  | | |  |
| 13.  ADVANCE PAYMENT REQUEST | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| I request an advance payment | | | | | Signature | | | | | | Date Signed | |
| 14.  REMARKS | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| Contracting Information | | | | | | | 15.  Contract or Branch Location | | | | | |
| CERTIFICATIONS | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| 16A.  School Official's Signature | | | | | | 16B.  School Name & Address | | | | | | |
| 16C.  Telephone Number | | | | | | 16D.Date Signed | | | | 16E  Fac Code | | |

**Figure 11.04.  Representation of Enrollment Certification (VA Form 22-1999)**

 

(4)  VA Form 22-1999, Enrollment Certification [(with the modifications shown in [subparagraph f)](#1109f)]; and

(5)  VA Forms 22-1999b and 22-1999b-1, Notice of Change in Student Status - Institutional Courses Only.

**d.  VA Forms Not for Use.**  The following VA forms or categories of VA forms are not for use under [section 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf):

(1)  Certification cards and forms;

(2)  Work-study forms;

(3)  VA Form 22-1990, Veteran's Application for Educational Benefits;

(4)  VA Form 22-1990t, Application and Enrollment Certification for Individualized Tutorial Assistance;

(5)  VA Form 22-1993a, Certificate of Eligibility; and

(6)  VA Form 22-1995, Request for Change of Program or Place of Training.

*[NOTE:  If one of the above forms is received, accept it as an informal claim.  Use the date of receipt of such form to establish a date of claim.  Request the applicant to complete and return VA Form 22-8889,if appropriate.  (See [par. 11.18a.](#1118a))]*

**e.  Form Letters.**  Current form letters are not to be used for section 901.  (See [subpar. b](#1109b) above regarding pattern letters.)

[**f.  Modification of Enrollment Certification.**  Not all items on VA Form 22-1999 are appropriate for [section 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf).  The following items either are not needed or are restricted for [section 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf):

(1)  Item 7, Credit for Previous Training.  This item is not appropriate for [section 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf). 

(2)  Item 8, Enrollment Effective Dates.  Schools must certify one term at a time. 

(3)  Item 13, Advance Payment.  Claimant's cannot receive an advance payment under [section 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf).]

**11.10  COURSES AND BENEFITS**

---

**a.  Courses Permitted.**  An individual may receive assistance and subsistence allowance only while receiving instruction in a post secondary level course offered at an accredited institution in the United States.  The United States includes the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.

**b.  Courses Not Allowed.**  The following courses are not allowed:

(1)  Apprenticeship courses;

(2)  OJT (on-job training) courses;

(3)  Cooperative and farm cooperative courses;

(4)  Elementary and secondary courses (includes remedial, refresher, and deficiency courses);

(5)  Courses offered by institutions located outside of the U.S. (except in Guam, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, or any overseas branches of U.S. schools);

(6)  Courses offered by nonaccredited institutions;

(7)  Correspondence courses, including combination correspondence-residence courses;

(8)  Independent study courses; and

(9)  Residency courses (medical, dental, internships, etc.).

*NOTE:  Courses that are considered avocational or recreational in nature are not prohibited, even though they are precluded under chapters 30, 32, and 35 of title 38, U.S.C., and chapter [1606] of title 10, U.S.C.*

**c.  Benefits Not Allowed.**  The following benefits are not allowed under [section 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf):

(1)  Work-study allowance;

(2)  Tutorial assistance; and

(3)  Education loans.

**11.11  REQUIREMENTS OF CURRENT VA EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS NOT APPLICABLE TO [SECTION 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf)**

---

Many of the current requirements for other VA education programs are not applicable to [section 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf).  The following is a list of some of the differences between [section 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf) and other VA education programs:

**a**.  No reporting fees.

**b.**  No advance payments.

**c.**  No payments for intervals between terms.

**d**.  No 85-15 percent requirement.

**e.**  No employment surveys.

**f.**  No requirement for State approving agency to approve courses.

**g.**  No limit to the number of changes of program.

**h.**  No requirement for credit for prior training.

**i.**  No satisfactory progress requirement.

**j**.  No mitigating circumstances provision.

**k**.  No school liability for overpayments.

**l.** No entitlement free training.

**m**.  No certifications (other than enrollment certifications).

**n.** No extensions to entitlement.

*NOTE:  [Public Law 102-16](https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/STATUTE-105/pdf/STATUTE-105-Pg48.pdf) provides counseling for veterans eligible under [section 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf).  Before enactment of that law, counseling was listed as a provision or requirement which did not apply to [section 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf).*

**11.12  ACCREDITED INSTITUTIONS**

---

For the purposes of [section 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf), the basic requirement for an approved course is that the enrolling institution be accredited.  (See the specific exclusions in [par. 11.09](#1109) above.)

**a.  Definition.**  An accredited institution is a civilian college or university or a trade, technical, or vocational school located in the United States.  This includes schools in the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, the U.S. Virgin Islands, and overseas branches of U.S. schools.  The school must be accredited by a nationally recognized accrediting agency or association, or by one recognized by the Secretary of Education.  The Department of Education publishes its criteria for recognition in [a book entitled Nationally Recognized Accrediting Agencies and State Agencies Recognized for the Approval of Public Post secondary Vocational Education and Nurse Education and the Criteria for Recognition by the U. S. Secretary of Education.]  An institution is not considered accredited if it is a candidate for accreditation.  Section [3675 of title 38,](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3675 edition:prelim)) U.S.C. does not apply to section 901.  (See [PART 01, GENERAL. CHAPTER 02, DEFINITIONS](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000063717?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), for the definition of "accrediting agency.")

*NOTE:  If the institution is a candidate for accreditation, it is not approved for section 901 benefits.*

**b.  Institution Listed in Approval File.**  [VSC] should review OLAF (On-Line Approval File) or the local approval file to determine whether a particular institution is listed as accredited or nonaccredited.  (See [Part 3: Chapter 6 - Programs of Education](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073633?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) paragraph 6.05 regarding review of course approval data.)

**c.  Institution Not Listed.**  If the institution is not listed in OLAF or the local approval file, [VSC] should contact the ELR (Educational Liaison Representative).  Before disallowing the claim, request the ELR to do the following:

(1)  Contact the ELR of the regional office in the State in which the school is located and inquire as to the status of accreditation; and

(2)  Issue to [VSC] an Optional Form 41, Routing and Transmittal Slip, regarding the facts found.

**SUBCHAPTER II.  INQUIRY, AWARD, AND DISALLOWANCE PROCESSING**

**11.13  DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY FOR [SECTION 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf) CLAIMS**

---

The current procedures outlined in part [Part 3: Chapter 1 - Administrative Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073486?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), will apply to the administration of section 901 claims.

**11.14  INQUIRIES**

---

Field stations receiving inquiries or questions regarding [section 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf) will refer them to the Veterans Services Officer at VA Regional Office, [701 Clay Avenue, Waco, TX 76799.  Contact via telephone should be made on (254) 299-9378.  Contact via E-Mail should be made to "[VAVBAWAC/RO/VA](mailto:VAVBAWAC/RO/VA?subject=Part%203%3A%20Chapter%2011%20-%20Section%20901)I"].

**a.**  The field station receiving the inquiry should obtain the following information:

(1)  Name of claimant.

(2)  Social Security number.

(3)  Branch of service.

(4)  EOD date.

(5)  RAD date.

(6)  Proof of participation in the section 901 program (if any).

**b.** Upon completion of the telephone call, forward all documentation regarding the inquiry to the Waco Regional Office.  Notify the claimant that his or her inquiry has been forwarded to the Waco office for a reply.

**c.** The regional office that received the initial inquiry will take no further action.  The Waco Regional Office will be responsible for processing the inquiry and notifying the claimant.

**d**.  See [PART 01, GENERAL. CHAPTER 05 - MISCELLANEOUS](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000064143?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)  subchapter II, regarding the use of information pamphlets for education benefit programs.  Reference to VA Pamphlet 22-90-5, Summary of Benefits Under the Educational Assistance Test Program - [Section 901 of Public Law 96-342](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf), is included in that chapter.

**11.15  DISALLOWANCES**

---

Prepare section 901 disallowances in accordance with [Part 3: Chapter 9 - Certificates of Eligibility and Disallowances](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000076203?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) .  Send a dictated letter to the applicant indicating the reason(s) for the disallowance and the evidence which provided the basis for the disallowance.  Provide a notice of procedural and appellate rights with each disallowance letter (see [par. 11.16](#1116) below regarding appeals).

**11.16  APPEALS**

---

All authorization decisions over which VA has authority under section 901 are subject to appeal.  When notifying the claimant of a disallowance, always furnish a notice of procedural and appellate rights.  The procedures for processing appeals are found in [Part 3: Chapter 2 - Administrative Procedures](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073501?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) , and [M21-1, part IV, chapter 8.](https://vbaw.vba.va.gov/bl/22/ref/m22-4/Part%20III/ch11.htm)

*NOTE:  A DOD decision that someone is ineligible is not appealable.  However, a VA decision to deny payment of benefits based on a DOD decision is appealable.  When providing notice of procedural and appellate rights, [VSC] should clearly advise the claimant of this distinction.  (See* [M22-4 Part 8: Chapter 3 - Eligibility Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073974?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)*regarding this issue in [ch. 1606] cases.)*

**11.17  AWARDS**

---

**a.  General.**  [VSC] should send award documents to the Finance activity for processing of payments.  To insure that award actions are processed out of the [BDN] system, clearly mark the award forms OUT-OF-SYSTEM AWARD - [SEC 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf).

**b.  Original Certificate of Eligibility.**  Once eligibility is established, prepare a VA Form 22-1992 in duplicate to record the C/E (certificate of eligibility) data.  Prepare the form in accordance with current procedures (see [Part 4: Chapter 12 - Out-of-System Award Processing](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073667?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) ) with the following exceptions:

(1)  Type of Claim (item 2) - In BOLD print, enter [SEC 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf) VETERAN or [SEC 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf) SERVICEPERSON as applicable.

(2)  Name and Address of Applicant (item 4A) - Enter OUT OF SYSTEM AWARD - [SEC 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf) in the space below the name and address.

(3)  RO No. (item 23) - Enter code 49 for the Waco Regional Office.

**c.  Original Award.**  For all original awards, prepare VA Form 22-1997, Education Award, in duplicate in accordance with current procedures (see [Part 4: Chapter 12 - Out-of-System Award Processing](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073667?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)) with the following exceptions:

(1)  Payee (item 3) - Enter 00 for a veteran or serviceperson, 10 for a dependent or surviving spouse, and 41, 42, 43, etc. for a dependent or surviving child.

(2)  RO No. (item 4) - Enter code 49 for the Waco Regional Office.

(3)  Name and Address of Payee (item 8A) - Below the address, enter the legend OUT OF SYSTEM AWARD - [SEC 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf).

(4)  Award Data (item 12).

(i)  Monthly Rate (item 12D) - For a veteran, or dependent of a veteran], enter the subsistence rate applicable based on training time.  (See [[Appendix A](#AppendixA)] for the correct rate.)  If a serviceperson, or dependent of a serviceperson, enter the legend ON DUTY. 

(ii)  Effective Date (item 12E) - Enter the beginning and ending dates for only one term, quarter, or semester at a time.

(iii)  Training Time (item 12F) - Enter 4 for full-time or 2 for part-time training.  Twelve or more semester hours (or the equivalent) is considered full time; less than 12 is considered part time.

(iv)  Entitlement Code (item 12G) - Enter 91 for a veteran or a dependent or survivor of a veteran.  Enter 95 for a serviceperson or a dependent or survivor of a serviceperson.

(v)  Attendance Hours Type (item 12H) - Only types Q, S, C, or P are applicable.

(vi)  Entitlement Charge (item 12K) - Leave this item blank.

(vii)  Remarks (item 13) - Enter the legend [SEC 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf).

(viii)  Total Charges (item 16) - Enter the total charges as certified by the school and any additional educational expenses claimed by the serviceperson, veteran, dependent, or survivor.  Circle the entry.  (Approved educational expenses are covered in [par. 11.18c](#1118c) below.)

*NOTE:  The Finance activity will calculate the maximum assistance allowance payable based on the entitlement charged for the award period.*

(5)  Do not complete the following items:

(i)  Initials and Surname of Person Entitled (Other than Veteran) (item 9).

(ii)  Chapter 35 Data (items 14 and 15).

(iii)  Number of Correspondence Lessons (item 17).

(iv)  Enrollment Period (item 19).

(v)  Extended Entitlement Indicator (item 20).

(vi)  Children Data (item 21).

**d.  Supplemental Certificate of Eligibility.**  If the veteran, serviceperson, or beneficiary changes his or her place or type of training, prepare a VA Form 22-1992.  Complete the form in duplicate in accordance with [subparagraph b](#1112b) above.  However, in Type of Certificate (item 10) check Supplemental (block 3).

*NOTE:  If the claimant changes his or her program without changing the place or type of training, do not prepare VA Form 22-1992.*

**e.  Reentrance and Amended Awards.**  Reentrance and amended awards will be prepared on VA Form 22-1997 in duplicate in accordance with current procedures (see [Part 4: Chapter 12 - Out-of-System Award Processing](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073667?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)) with the exceptions listed in [subparagraph c](#1112c) above.

**f.  Stop-Suspend-Resume Payment.**  A stop, suspend, or resume will be prepared on VA Form [22-8046], Payment Notice (Stop-Suspend-Resume).  It will be prepared in duplicate in accordance with current procedures (see [Part 4: Chapter 12 - Out-of-System Award Processing](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073667?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)), with the following exceptions:

(1)  Type of Award (item 1) - Enter [SEC 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf).

(2)  Payee No. (item 3) -  Enter 00 for a veteran or serviceperson, 10 for a dependent or surviving spouse, and 41, 42, 43, etc., for a dependent or surviving child.

(3)  New Address (item 10) - Enter the name and legend OUT-OF-SYSTEM AWARD - [SEC 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf).

(4)  Copy to (item 17) - Check the blank block and annotate FINANCE.

*NOTE:  If a stop payment results in an amended amount of tuition and fees, the stop must be submitted to Finance on VA Form 22-1997.*

**11.18  AWARD CONSIDERATIONS**

---

**a.  Time Limit on Claims.** VA may consider any communication from an individual, an authorized representative, or a member of Congress indicating an intent to apply for educational assistance or subsistence to be an informal claim (see the NOTE to [par. 11.09d](#1109d) above regarding receipt of improper forms).  If a communication is received by VA, but further information from the claimant is requested, he or she has 1 year from the date VA requests the information to reply.  If not received, the claim is to be considered abandoned and treated as such.  Any subsequent communication will be considered as a new claim effective the date of receipt in VA.

(1)  The mere act of enrolling in an accredited institution does not constitute an informal claim for VA purposes.

(2)  If the claimant can show good cause, VA will grant an extension of the time limit for filing or perfecting a claim.  In addition to showing good cause, the claimant must take the required action (e.g., filing the claim) concurrently with or before filing a request for an extension.  An example of good cause would be the failure of VA to notify the claimant of the time limit for completing the claim.

**b.  Divisions of the School Year.**  The following definitions are provided by [38 CFR 21.5720(g):](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=93323ab6e68629f50c00f458eab54b45&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15720)  

(1)  Standard Academic Year - A period of 2 semesters or 3 quarters which is 9 months long.  This definition is slightly different than the definition for ordinary school year provided in [38 CFR 21.4200(b)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=a8caa53b04cd70501a8fe85902ebe4ae&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14200).

(2)  Standard Quarter - A division of the academic year which is 10 to 13 weeks long.

(3)  Standard Semester - A division of the academic year which is 15 to 19 weeks long.

(4)  Term - A term is either any regular established division of the standard academic year, or the period of instruction that takes place between standard academic years.

**c.  Determining Educational Expenses.**  Allowable educational expenses for [section 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf) include tuition, fees, books, and lab and shop fees for consumable materials.  [Expenses must be for materials used as part of classroom or laboratory instruction.  Expenses should also be equal to those normally incurred by students at the institution involved.]  The school certifying official will report tuition and fees on VA Form 22-1999.  The claimant must furnish a statement itemizing all other educational expenses and the amount paid for each.

**d.  Determining Training Time.**  Determine the training time for an eligible claimant under the [section 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf) program as follows:

(1)  Credit Hour Measurement - Standard Term - Undergraduate:  Twelve or more undergraduate hours (semester or quarter), will constitute full-time training.  Any number of credit hours less than 12 will constitute part-time training.

(2)  Credit Hour Measurement - Nonstandard Term - Undergraduate:  Determine this training time as follows:

(i)  Multiply the credits earned in the term by 18 if credit hours are semester, or by 12 if credit hours are quarter; and

(ii)  Divide the product by the number of whole weeks in the term.

In determining whole weeks:

Divide the number of days in the term by 7;

Disregard a remainder of 3 days or less; and

Consider 4 days or more to be a whole week.

(iii)  If the result obtained by using the formula in [subparagraphs (a)](#1118a) and [(b)](#1118b) above is 12 or more, the training time will be full time.  If the result is less than 12, the training time is part time.

(3)  Credit Hour Measurement - Graduate

(i)  If the established policy of a school is to determine the training time for a graduate student, VA will accept the school's certification.

(ii)  If the school does not have an established policy in this matter, VA will measure the student's enrollment according to subparagraph (1) or (2).  This policy has the effect of not distinguishing between graduate or undergraduate training.  If the student is taking both types of courses concurrently, VA will combine the credit hours of the courses as reported by the school and calculate the equivalent training time.  (See [Part 4: Chapter 6 - Measurement of College Level Courses](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073534?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) .)

(4)  Clock Hour Measurement

(i)  If the student enrolls in a course measured in clock hours and if shop practice is an integral part of the course, he or she is considered a full-time student when enrolled for 22 or more clock hours with not more than a 2-hour rest period.  If enrolled for less than 22 clock hours, he or she is considered enrolled as a part-time student.  VA will exclude supervised study in determining the number of clock hours for which the student is enrolled (see [Part 4: Chapter 7 - Other Measurement Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073560?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) ).

(ii)  If an individual enrolls in a course measured in clock hours and if theory and class instruction predominate in the course, he or she is a full-time student when enrolled in 18 clock hours or more.  He or she is a part-time student when enrolled in less than 18 clock hours.  Customary intervals not to exceed 10 minutes between classes will be included in measuring net instruction.  Shop practice, rest periods, and supervised study are excluded.  Supervised instruction periods in school shops, the time involved in field trips, and individual and group instruction may be included in computing clock-hour measurement.

**e.  Reports of Withdrawals.**  The claimant is responsible for reporting to VA whenever he or she withdraws or changes training time.  However, the school may be requested to do so on behalf of the student.  The report should include:

(1)  The date of withdrawal or change in training time;

(2)  The new number of credit or clock hours (if there is a change in training time); and

(3)  The amended amount of educational expenses actually incurred by the student during the period of enrollment before the date of withdrawal.

*NOTE:  Claimants and school officials who submit false or fraudulent claims, are subject to the provisions of the False Claims Act ([31 U.S.C. 3729-31](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:31 section:3729 edition:prelim)); [18 U.S.C. 1001ff)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:18 section:1001 edition:prelim)).  Schools are not to be held liable for overpayments except where fraud is involved.  This is true even if the overpayments are the result of false or erroneous certifications.*

**f.  Specific Termination (or Reduction) Dates**

(1)  Death of the Claimant

(i)  Terminate the assistance allowance effective the last day of the most recent term, quarter, semester, or enrollment period for which the individual received educational assistance (see [38 CFR 21.5835(a)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=a8caa53b04cd70501a8fe85902ebe4ae&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15835)).  Do not create an overpayment.

(ii)  Terminate the subsistence allowance effective the last date of attendance.

(2)  Lump-Sum Cash Out Payment.  When a serviceperson receives a cash out payment, terminate the assistance allowance on the date he or she elects to receive the lump-sum.  (See [par. 11.07](#1107) above.)

(3)  Course Discontinued, Interrupted, or Withdrawn From.  If any of these actions occur (for all courses being taken), terminate the allowance being paid (i.e., assistance, subsistence, or both) effective the last date of attendance.

(4)  Reduction Due to Decreased Training Time.  Reduce the assistance and subsistence allowances effective the end of the month in which the claimant becomes a part-time student, or the end of the term, whichever is earlier.

(5)  False Claims.  Terminate both allowances effective the first day of the term for which the false claim was submitted.

(6)  Withdrawal of Accreditation.  Terminate both allowances effective the end of the month in which the accreditation was withdrawn, or the end of the term, whichever is earlier.

(7)  Remarriage of a Surviving Spouse.  Terminate both allowances effective the last date of attendance before the date on which the surviving spouse remarries.

(8)  Divorce.  If entitlement has been transferred to an eligible spouse, and the veteran or serviceperson and his or her spouse are subsequently divorced, terminate both allowances effective the last date of attendance before the date on which the divorce becomes final.

(9)  Revocation of Transfer of Entitlement.  If a veteran or serviceperson revokes a transfer of entitlement, terminate the dependent's educational assistance on the effective date of the revocation.

(10)  Dependent Child Ceases to be Dependent

(i)  Veteran or Serviceperson is Living [(38 CFR 21.5835(j)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=9b710c98b06daf10b756506d9930358c&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15835)).  If a live veteran or serviceperson has transferred entitlement to his or her child who is not incapable of self support due to physical or mental incapacity, terminate both allowances whenever the child no longer meets the definition of "dependent child" as provided in [38 CFR 21.5720(c)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=6dba489cbf969a33562562c4f40d6e35&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15720). The effective date of discontinuance is the earliest of the following:

A.  The child's 21st birthday, if on that date:

I.  The veteran or serviceperson is not providing over one-half of the child's support; or

II.  The child is not enrolled in a full-time course of study in an IHL (institution of higher learning) approved by the Secretary of Defense or the Secretary of Education.

B.  The date following the child's 21st birthday on which the veteran or serviceperson stops providing over one-half of the child's support.

C.  The date following the child's 21st birthday on which he or she is no longer enrolled in a full-time course of study at an IHL approved by the Secretary of Defense or the Secretary of Education.

D.  The child's 23rd birthday.

E.  The date the child marries.

(ii)  Veteran or Serviceperson is Deceased [(38 CFR 21.5835(k))](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=6dba489cbf969a33562562c4f40d6e35&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15835).  If a veteran or serviceperson is deceased and his or her surviving child is not capable of self-support due to physical or mental disability, terminate both allowances whenever the child no longer meets the definition of "dependent child" as provided in [38 CFR 21.5720(c).](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=93323ab6e68629f50c00f458eab54b45&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15720)  The effective date of discontinuance is the earliest of the following:

A.  The child's 21st birthday, if on that date the child is not enrolled in a full-time course of study in an IHL approved by the Secretary of Defense or the Secretary of Education.

B.  The date following the child's 21st birthday on which he or she is no longer enrolled in a full-time course of study at an IHL approved by the Secretary of Defense or the Secretary of Education.

C.  The child's 23rd birthday.

D.  The date the child marries.

**11.19  NOTIFICATION OF AWARD ACTION**

---

In an effort to deter possible fraud [and for compliance survey notification , VSC should notify the ELR of all [section 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf) awards.

**a.**  VSC should notify the CELO (Chief Education Liaison Officer) at the RPO (Regional Processing Office) having jurisdiction over the school that a [section 90l](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf) recipient is training at a school in his or her jurisdiction.  For this purpose, VSC can send the CELO e-mail with the following information:

(1)  The full name and file number of each beneficiary

(2)  The full name and address of the institution. 

(3)  The name and telephone number of a contact point for any necessary future coordination.  (This is needed if the CELO determines a compliance survey warrants adjustment of the [section 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf) award)

**b.**  VSC should make this notification for each original award and for each reentrance award involving a change in place of training.  VSC should keep a copy in the claimant's [section 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf) records.

**c.**  If the CELO reports that the [section 90l](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf) recipient did not train as indicated on the enrollment certification(s) in file, VSC] should prepare an amended award to reflect the correct enrollment data.

**11.20  END PRODUCTS**

---

See [M22-3, appendix A.](http://www.warms.vba.va.gov/admin22/m22_3/appa.doc)

**11.21  DISPOSITION OF AWARDS**

---

[VSC] should prepare all authorization actions in original and one copy.  File the original in the [claimant's [section 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf)] folder.  Route the copy to the Finance activity for action (e.g., payment, charging entitlement, establishment of accounts receivables, diary).  An overprinted Optional Form 41 may be used for routing and identification purposes at local discretion.

**11.22  CHANGE OF STATUS**

---

**a.  Change From Inservice to Veteran Status.**  Upon receipt of a notice that a serviceperson has been discharged from active duty, [VSC] must make a determination as to eligibility.

(1)  If eligibility does not exist (e.g., character of discharge is a bar), any educational benefits authorized for periods after the serviceperson was released from active duty will be terminated effective the day after the RAD date.  A dictated letter must be sent in order to:

(i)  Explain the reason for denial or termination;

(ii)  Indicate the evidence upon which VA has made its decision; and

(iii)  Inform the veteran of his or her procedural and appellate rights.

(2)  If eligibility exists, prepare Optional Form 41 in duplicate to reflect veteran status.  Forward the original to the Finance activity and file the copy in the folder.  On the Optional Form 41, indicate a notice of change to veteran status with the following information:

(i)  RAD;

(ii)  Entitlement code 91; and

(iii)  Delimiting date.

*NOTE:  If eligibility exists and the veteran received payment as a serviceperson (assistance allowance only), it may be necessary to prepare an amended award to pay subsistence allowance for the period following discharge.  When preparing an amended award, use entitlement code 91.  In the Remarks section clearly annotate that there has been a change of status, and enter the appropriate RAD and delimiting date.  Optional Form 41 will not be prepared, if the appropriate status information has been furnished on an amended award.*

**b.  Change from Veteran to Inservice Status.**  Upon receipt of a notice that a veteran has returned to active duty, [VSC] should prepare Optional Form 41 in duplicate to reflect inservice status.  Forward the original to the Finance activity and file the copy in the folder.  On the Optional Form 41, indicate that the claimant has reentered service.  Also indicate that the entitlement code should be 95.

*NOTE:  If eligibility exists and the serviceperson is receiving payment as a veteran (assistance and subsistence allowance), it will be necessary to prepare an amended award to terminate only the subsistence allowance for the period following discharge.  When preparing an amended award, use entitlement code 95.  In the Remarks section clearly annotate that there has been a change of status, and enter the appropriate EOD.  Optional Form 41 will not be prepared, if the appropriate status information has been furnished on an amended award.*

**c.  Effect of Change in Status on Dependents.**  A change in a veteran's or serviceperson's status will affect the entitlement of a dependent who may be receiving benefits based on an entitlement transfer (see [par. 11.23(a)](#1123a) below).  Upon receipt of a notice of a change in the status of a veteran or a serviceperson, follow the procedures in [subparagraph a](#1122a) or [b](#1122b) above when adjusting an award for a dependent.

*NOTE:  A change in active service status may result in a change in the amount of benefits being paid.  A serviceperson, or the dependent of a serviceperson, is not entitled to receive subsistence allowance while training.*

**SUBCHAPTER III.  DEPENDENCY AND ENTITLEMENT TRANSFER**

**11.23  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPENDENCY**

---

**a.**  If a veteran or serviceperson wishes to transfer entitlement to a dependent, he or she must establish the relationship of that individual as required by law.  (See [38 CFR 3.205](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=a8caa53b04cd70501a8fe85902ebe4ae&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.1.3_1205), [3.209](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=a8caa53b04cd70501a8fe85902ebe4ae&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.1.3_1209), and [3.210.](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=a8caa53b04cd70501a8fe85902ebe4ae&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.1.3_1210))

**b**.  Definitions

(1)  [38 CFR 21.5720(c)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=93323ab6e68629f50c00f458eab54b45&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15720) defines the term "dependent child."

*NOTE:  This regulation provides that a dependent, helpless, or school child must rely upon the veteran for over one-half of his or her support.  Also, a surviving helpless or school child must have been dependent upon the veteran for over one-half of his or her support at the time of the veteran's death.*

(2)  [38 CFR 21.5720(d)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=93323ab6e68629f50c00f458eab54b45&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15720) defines the term "surviving spouse."

(3)  [38 CFR 21.5720(f)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=93323ab6e68629f50c00f458eab54b45&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15720) defines the term "spouse."

**11.24  TRANSFER OF ENTITLEMENT**

---

**a**.  The law provides that a serviceman or veteran with basic eligibility to [section 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf) may elect to transfer all or part of his or her entitlement to a dependent spouse or child.

**b**.  Servicepersons and veterans of the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps may make an entitlement transfer under the following conditions:

(1)  The individual has completed the enlistment upon which his or her entitlement is based or has been discharged for one of the following reasons:

(i)  For hardship under [10 U.S.C. 1173;](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:1173 edition:prelim)) or

(ii)  For early-out under [10 U.S.C. 1171](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:1171 edition:prelim)); or

(iii)  For a disability incurred or aggravated in line of duty; or

(iv)  Is determined to have a service-connected disability from which he or she accrues entitlement to compensation under [38 CFR 3.4;](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=a8caa53b04cd70501a8fe85902ebe4ae&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.1.3_14) and

(2) The individual has thereafter reenlisted.

**c**.  Only servicepersons and veterans of the Navy and Marine Corps may make an entitlement transfer under the following conditions:

(1)  The enlistment that established the individual's entitlement was his or her second reenlistment as a member of the Armed Forces;

(2)  The individual has completed at least 4 years of active service of that second reenlistment; and

(3)  The individual's second reenlistment was for a period of a least 6 years.

**d.**  A living serviceperson or veteran can not transfer entitlement to more than one person at a time (see [38 CFR 21.5743(a)(1) and (c)(2)).](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=a8caa53b04cd70501a8fe85902ebe4ae&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15743)

**e.**  A dependent to whom a veteran or serviceperson transfers entitlement is entitled to educational assistance or subsistence allowance in the same manner and at the same rate as the individual from whom it was transferred.

(1)  A dependent of a serviceperson may only receive educational assistance.

(2)  A dependent of a veteran may receive educational assistance, educational subsistence, or both.

**f.**  A dependent may not receive benefits beyond the veteran's delimiting date, which is 10 years from the veteran's retirement or last discharge.

**g.**  The veteran's or serviceperson's remaining entitlement is the maximum entitlement transferable to a spouse and children. 

**11.25  TRANSFER OF ENTITLEMENT UPON THE DEATH OF A SERVICEPERSON OR VETERAN**

---

**a.** [Under certain conditions, VA will transfer a claimant's section 901 entitlement to his or her dependents.  (See [38 U.S.C. 21.5743(b).](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=a8caa53b04cd70501a8fe85902ebe4ae&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15743)]  A serviceperson's or veteran's entitlement to educational assistance and subsistence allowance shall be transferred by VA, if he or she:

(1)  Has [already completed the enlistment upon which the entitlement to section 901] is based;

(2)  Has thereafter reenlisted [after completion of the first enlistment];

(3)  Has never elected not to transfer entitlement; and

(4)  Dies while on active duty or within 10 years from the date he or she retired, was discharged, or was otherwise separated from active duty.

**b**.  The serviceperson's or veteran's entitlement will be transferred to his or her survivors as follows:

(1)  The serviceperson's or veteran's surviving spouse; or

(2)  The serviceperson's or veteran's dependent children, if the serviceperson or veteran has no surviving spouse.

**c.**  A surviving spouse who received entitlement [under subparagraph b(1)] upon the death of a serviceperson or a veteran may elect to transfer that entitlement to the serviceperson's or veteran's dependent children.

**d.**  [Serviceperson's can elect to transfer section 901 entitlement effective on a specified date.  This can be a future date.  If a serviceperson transfers entitlement on a specific date and then dies, but the effective date of the transfer is more than 10 years from the date of his or her death, the serviceperson's] transfer shall be void.  The entitlement will be transferred by VA to the surviving spouse or children as provided above.

**11.26  ELECTION TO TRANSFER ENTITLEMENT**

---

Before an entitlement transfer can be processed, a formal election from the serviceperson, veteran, or surviving spouse must be on file.

**a.**  The election must be specific as to:

(1)  The serviceperson's, veteran's, or surviving spouse's intent to make an entitlement transfer;

(2)  The person to whom the serviceperson, veteran, or surviving spouse wishes to transfer entitlement;

(3)  The amount of entitlement to be transferred; and

(4)  The date the transfer is to take effect.

**b.**  An ambiguous statement made by the serviceperson, veteran, or surviving spouse or a third-party statement should not be accepted at face value.  If such a statement is received, [VSC] should send a dictated letter to the serviceperson, veteran, or surviving spouse explaining that an election is required before further action can be taken.

**c**.  The formal election should include the following statements and certification:

(1)  Statement of Election

"I hereby elect to transfer XX month(s) and XX day(s) of entitlement under the Educational Assistance Test Program ([Section 901 of Public Law 96-342](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf)) to XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX (insert name of dependent), effective XX-XX-XX."

(2)  Statement of Understanding

"I understand that:

This entitlement is only for the use of the person specified above, who is my dependent spouse or child;

I may transfer entitlement to only one person at a time;

My dependent may use only the amount of entitlement transferred (which may not exceed a maximum of 36 months);

While I am on active duty, my dependent may only receive educational assistance (payment of tuition, fees, books, and other supplies); and

My dependent may not use any entitlement beyond my delimiting date, which is 10 years from the date of my retirement or last discharge from service."

(3)  Certification.  The serviceperson, veteran, or surviving spouse must enter the date and his or her signature below the following certification:

"I hereby certify that the above statement of election is made of my own free will, and that all information provided is true and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief."

**11.27  REVOCATION OF ELECTION**

---

A serviceperson, veteran, or surviving spouse may revoke his or her election to transfer entitlement by notifying VA in writing.

**a.**  For servicepersons and veterans, revocation of the entitlement transfer must be made before the expiration of the entitlement.  For a veteran, the revocation must be made before the delimiting date.

**b.**  For a surviving spouse, revocation of the entitlement transfer must be made before the expiration of entitlement, and before the delimiting date (10 years from the date of the serviceperson's or veteran's death).

**c.**  The serviceperson, veteran, or surviving spouse may choose the effective date of revocation subject to the following conditions:

(1)  If the person to whom entitlement is transferred never enters training, the effective date of the revocation may be any date chosen by the veteran, serviceperson, or surviving spouse;

(2)  If the person to whom entitlement is transferred is not in training on the date VA processes the revocation, but he or she has trained before that date, the effective date of the revocation may be no earlier than the last date of attendance; or

(3)  If the person to whom entitlement is transferred is in training (for which educational assistance and subsistence allowance are payable) on the date VA processes the revocation, the effective date of the revocation may be no earlier than:

(i)  The last day of the term, quarter, or semester at the accredited institution where that person is enrolled; or

(ii)  The last date of the course or the last date of the school year, whichever is earlier, if the accredited institution is not organized on a term, quarter, or semester basis.

**d**.  If a serviceperson, veteran, or surviving spouse indicates that he or she wishes to revoke the election to transfer entitlement, a formal statement of revocation should be requested by dictated letter.  The letter should indicate the conditions for the selection of an effective date as described above.

**e.**  A formal revocation should contain the following statement and certification:

(1)  Statement of Revocation

"I hereby revoke my election to transfer entitlement under the Educational Assistance Test Program ([Section 901 of Public Law 96-342](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf)) to XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX (insert name of dependent).  This revocation is effective XX-XX-XX."

(2)  Certification.  The serviceperson, veteran, or surviving spouse  must enter the date and his or her signature below the following certification:

"I hereby certify that the above revocation of election is made of my own free will, and that all information provided is true and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief."

**APPENDIX A**

**[SECTION 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf) RATES**  
(FY 05 and FY 06 rates  
(FY 07 Rates)

This appendix provides the rate tables for Section 901. 

 

| **Effective Date** |  | **10/1/04** | **10/1/03** | **10/1/02** |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
Section 901 Rates

| Yearly Assistance |  | $4814 | $4219 | $3849 |
| Monthly Subsistence |  |  |  |  |
| Full-Time |  | $1199 | $1051 | $959 |
| Part-Time |  | $599.50] | $525.50 | $479.50 |
|  | | | | |
| **Effective Date** | **10/1/01** | **10/1/00** | **10/1/99** | **10/1/98** |
| Yearly Assistance | $3690 | $3524 | $3388 | $3258 |
| Monthly Subsistence |  |  |  |  |
| Full-Time | $919 | $878 | $844 | $812 |
| Part-Time | $459.50 | $439 | $422 | $406 |
|  | | | | |
| **Effective Date** | **10/1/97** | **10/1/96** | **10/1/95** | **10/1/94** |
| Yearly Assistance | $3103 | $2927 | $2761 | $2605 |
| Monthly Subsistence |  |  |  |  |
| Full-Time | $773 | $729 | $688 | $649 |
| Part-Time | $386.50 | $364.50 | $344 | $324.50 |
|  | | | | |
| **Effective Date** | **10/1/93** | **10/1/92** | **10/1/91** | **10/1/90** |
| Yearly Assistance | $2412 | $2254 | $2087 | $1969 |
| Monthly Subsistence |  |  |  |  |
| Full-Time | $601 | $562 | $520 | $491 |
| Part-Time | $300.50 | $281 | $260 | $245.50 |
|  | | | | |
| **Effective Date** | **10/1/89** | **10/1/88** | **10/1/87** | **10/1/86** |
| Yearly Assistance | $1858 | $1753 | $1654 | $1560 |
| Monthly Subsistence |  |  |  |  |
| Full-Time | $463 | $437 | $412 | $389 |
| Part-Time | $231.50 | $218.50 | $206 | $194.50 |
|  | | | | |
| **Effective Date** | **10/1/85** | **10/1/84** | **10/1/83** | **10/1/82** |
| Yearly Assistance | $1470 | $1374 | $1284 | $1200 |
| Monthly Subsistence |  |  |  |  |
| Full-Time | $367 | $343 | $321 | $300 |
| Part-Time | $183.50 | $171.50 | $160.50 | $150 |

**Table 11.01 [Section 901](http://uscode.house.gov/statutes/pl/96/342.pdf) Rates**