# Sub-Chapter 1. Service Members

## Sub-Chapter 1. Service Members

**a.** This section of the Post-9/11 GI Bill (chapter 33) Benefits Manual explains the eligibility criteria required for service members who want to receive benefits under chapter 33.

Learn more about the following eligibility criteria:

[1.01 Qualifying Service](#101)

[1.02 Length of Service](#102)

[1.03 National Guard](#103)

[1.04 Excluded Service](#104)

## 1.01 Qualifying Service

---

**a. A service member** is eligible for Post-9/11 GI Bill education benefits if he or she served a minimum of 90 days on active duty after September 10, 2001. This covers certain types of active duty served as a member of the Uniformed Services or because of a call up or order to active duty from a selected reserve component (National Guard or Reserve) for title 10 mobilizations and under certain sections of Title 32.

**b. Active Duty**

Service members can use the Post-9/11 GI Bill on active duty as long as they have completed at least 90 days of qualifying service after September 10, 2001, and continue to be on active duty. This does not include basic entry-level and skill training if less than 24 months of active duty are accrued. The tuition payment is limited to the net out-of-pocket expenses after the deduction of certain types of 3rd party assistance including federal tuition assistance.

[Back to top](#TOP)

## 1.02 Length of Service

---

**a. Benefit Level chart**

All benefit payments are based on the amount of qualifying active-duty service each veteran has after September 10, 2001. The benefit level chart outlines the percentage of benefits based on qualifying service. It applies to active-duty, National Guard, or Selected Reserve members, who have served on active duty for at least 90 days.

| **Qualifying Post-9/11 Service** | **Number of Days** | **Percentage of Maximum Benefit Payable** |
| --- | --- | --- |
| At least 36 months | If aggregate service *(including* entry training) is 1095 days or more days | 100% |
| At least 30 continuous days on active duty and must be discharged due to service-connected disability |  | 100% |
| Purple Heart Recipients |  | 100% |
| 30 months  (At least 30 months, but less than 36 months) | If aggregate service *(including* entry training) is from 910 to 1094 days | 90% |
| 24 months  (At least 24 months, but less than 30 months) | If aggregate service *(including* entry training) is from 730 to 909 days | \*80% (asterisk for percentage for initial skills and training) |
| 18 months  (At least 18 months, but less than 24 months | If aggregate service *(excluding* entry training) is from 545 to 729 days | \*70% (asterisk for percentage for initial skills and training) |
| 6 months  (At least 6 months, but less than 18 months | If aggregate service *(excluding* entry training) is from 180 to 544 days | 60% |
| 90 days  (At least 90 days, but less than 6 months) | If aggregate service *(excluding* entry training) is from 90 to 179 days | 40%  50% |

\*The 70/80% rule is as follows:

If the aggregate service including training is at least 24 months (730-909 days) but less than 30 months (910-1094 days) AND the aggregate service excluding training is at least 18 months (545 to 729 days) but less than 24 months, the individual will be deemed eligible at the 70% benefit level. See sub-chapter 5.03 Periods of active duty deducted for eligibility

---

***Sources***

* [PL 110-252](https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/USCODE-2011-title38/html/USCODE-2011-title38-partIII-chap33-subchapII-sec3311.htm), Chapter 33 Post-9/11 Educational Assistance, Subchapter II-Educational Assistance, Section 3311. Educational assistance for service in the Armed Forces commencing on or after September 11, 2001: entitlement
* [PL 110-252](http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/USCODE-2011-title38/html/USCODE-2011-title38-partIII-chap33-subchapII-sec3312.htm), Chapter 33 Post-9/11 Educational Assistance, Subchapter II-Educational Assistance, Section 3312. Educational assistance: duration
* PL 111-377, Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act of 2010, Title II Other Educational Assistance Matters, Section 101. Modification of Entitlement to Educational Assistance
* PL 111-377 Training Slides
* Electronic Code of Federal Regulations. [§ 21.9520 Basic Eligibility](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=220f028341598bb97b45bd8f349eaa84&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_19520)
* [Post-9/11 GI Bill Eligibility for Active Duty Veterans](https://gibill.custhelp.com/app/answers/detail/a_id/947/session/L3RpbWUvMTMyNzk3NzUxMi9zaWQvdC0xYmx1UGs%3D)
* Electronic Code of Federal Regulations. [§ 21.9640 Rates of payment of educational assistance](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=8298f78cb77333212be7c99c578fe8d4&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_19640)

[Back to top](#TOP)

 1.03 National Guard

---

**a. Note**: Effective October 1, 2011, VA began paying benefits to members of the Army National Guard and Air National Guard based on qualifying service under title 32. Payments may be made retroactively for enrollment(s) at an approved educational institution for attendance on or after August 1, 2009. The following service may be qualifying:

* Full-time service in the National Guard for the purpose of organizing, administering, recruiting, instructing, or training;
* Activations in support of a national emergency under Section 502(f) of title 32.

***Sources***

* PL 111-377, Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act of 2010, Title II Other Educational Assistance Matters, Section 101. Modification of Entitlement to Educational Assistance
* PL 111-377, Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act of 2010, Title II Other Educational Assistance Matters, Section 101. Modification of Entitlement to Educational Assistance
* Electronic Code of Federal Regulations. [§ 21.9520 Basic Eligibility](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=a9b1ac98530cd696b233ea1319b6f64b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_19520)

[Back to top](#TOP)

**1.04 Excluded Service**

---

**a. Some periods of active-duty service do not qualify** as creditable service. Periods of service under the following do not count toward qualification for the Post-9/11 GI Bill:

* Active Guard Reserve (AGR) (Title 32) if not under 502(f) for the purposes of organizing, administering, training, recruiting, and instructing.
* ROTC under 10 U.S.C. 2107(b)
* Service Academy contract period
* Service terminated due to defective enlistment agreement
* Service used for college loan repayment
* Selected reserve service used to establish eligibility under the Montgomery GI Bill (MGIB chapter 30), MGIB for Selected Reserve (MGIB-SR, chapter 1606), or the Reserve Education Assistance Program (REAP, chapter 1607)
* Active Duty Service Obligation (ADSO) associated with the Coast Guard Academy Obligated after January 3, 2011 ADSO with Coast Guard Academy is not qualifying service.

Learn more about Excluded Service issues.

***Sources***

* [PL 110-252](https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/USCODE-2011-title38/html/USCODE-2011-title38-partIII-chap33-subchapII-sec3311.htm), Chapter 33 Post-9/11 Educational Assistance, Subchapter II-Educational Assistance, Section 3311 Educational assistance for service in the Armed Forces commencing on or after September 11, 2001: entitlement
* PL 111-377, Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act of 2010, Title II Other Educational Assistance Matters, Section 101. Modification of Entitlement to Educational Assistance
* Electronic Code of Federal Regulations. [§ 21.9505 Definitions – Active Duty](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=e04dcbd4cb73c97393d42f3dbb8245f1&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_19505)

 [Back to top](#TOP)

 **Last updated:** October 5, 2015

**Internal Documents:**

Procedural Advisory: Long Term Solution (LTS) Release 5.1.1 School Debt Letter Generation