# Part 3: Chapter 8 - Periodic Education Certifications

**Part 3: Chapter 8 - Periodic Education Certifications**

[8.01 General](#801)  
[8.02 VA Form 22-6553, Verification of Pursuit of Course Leading to a Standard College Degree](#802)  
[8.03 VA Form 22-8979, Student Verification of Enrollment](#803)  
[8.03A Processing Enrollment Changes Reported by Student](#803A)  
[8.04 VA Form 22-6553b, Certification of Lessons Completed](#804)  
[8.05 VA Form 22-6553c, Monthly Certification of Flight Training](#805)  
[8.06 Monthly Certification of On-the-Job and Apprenticeship Training](#806)  
[8.07 Periodic Education Certification Not Obtainable](#807)  
[8.08 Excessive Rate Lines](#808)  
[8.09 Alternate Means for Submitting Verifications or Certifications](#809)  
[8.10 Termination Verifications or Certifications](#810)  
  
**Figures**  
[8.01 Summary of Certification Forms Used for Each Benefit](#f801)  
[8.02 Verification of Pursuit (Original or Reentrance Award—Chapter 35)](#f802)  
[8.03 Verification of Pursuit (Original or Reentrance Award—Chapter 32)](#f803)  
[8.04 Verification of Pursuit (Amended Award—Chapters 32 and 35)](#f804)

 

**8.01  GENERAL**

---

**a.  Definition**.  The term "periodic education certification" refers to the forms that veterans and other beneficiaries must complete and return in order to receive [education payments].  When appropriate, the claimant's school must also complete either appropriate parts of a certification or an entire certification.  The different certification forms have different names [including] "verifications of enrollment," and "verifications of pursuit."

 **b.  Certifications Required**.  [Periodic education certifications are required under chapters 30, 32, and 35 of 38 U.S.C., section 903 of Public Law 96-342, chapter 1606 of 10 U.S.C., and the Omnibus Diplomatic Security and Antiterrorism Act of 1986.  Certification procedures which apply to chapter 32 apply equally to section 903.  See [Part 3: Chapter 11 - Section 901](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073555?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) paragraph 11.11 for certifications required under section 901 of Public Law 96-342.  See [Part 3: Chapter 12 - The Antiterrorism Act](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073280?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)  paragraph 12.07 for certifications required under the Antiterrorism Act.]

**c.  Certification Forms**.  See [figure 8.01](#f801) for a summary of certification forms used for the various benefits and types of training. 

| **BENEFIT** | **IHL** | **NCD** | **CORR** | **FLT** | **OJT** |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
Certification Forms

|  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **CH 30** | 22-8979  BDN | 22-8979  BDN | 22-6553b-1  PC | 22-6553c\* | 22-6553d-1  PC |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **CH 32/ SEC 903** | 22-6553  BDN | 22-8979  BDN | 22-6553b  (Manual) | 22-6553c\* | 22-6553d  (Manual) |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **CH 35** | 22-6553  BDN | 22-8979  BDN | 22-6553b  BDN | N/A | 22-6553d  BDN |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **CH [1606]** | 22-8979\*\*  BDN | 22-8979\*\*  BDN | 22-6553b-1  (Manual) | 22-6553c\* | 22-6553d-1  (Manual) |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |

  \*   This form is not issued from a payment system but is distributed directly to schools.  
  \*\*  This form will be issued when revised regulations are finalized.

**Figure 8.01  Summary of Certification Forms Used for Each Benefit**

* *NOTE:  VA Form 22-8979, Student Verification of Enrollment, replaced VA Form 22-6553a, Certification of Attendance (for Courses Not Leading to a Standard College Degree and Farm Cooperative Courses), which had previously been the NCD (Non-College Degree) certification form for chapters 32 and 35.  Data entry procedures for BDN (Benefits Delivery Network) were not affected by this change of form.  VA Form 22-8979 for chapter 30 (including NCD) has a bar code with certification information.  See* [Part 3: Chapter 8 - Periodic Education Certifications](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000076131?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)paragraph 8.09a *for alternate forms available.]*

**d.  Certification Issuance**.  In most instances certifications are issued by the BDN. See [Part 2 Chapter 1 - Computer Processing Concepts](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000078763?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), paragraph 1.13, for information on the BDN schedules of operations for the various education benefits.  Some certifications are issued by the Chapter 30 PC (Personal Computer) system and some are issued through manual payment systems.  [Figure 8.01](#f801) indicates the method of issuance. 

**e.  Certification Processing**.  Certification procedures differ depending upon the type of training the claimant is pursuing and the benefit involved.  RPO (Regional Processing Office) personnel who prepare education awards and other authorizations must be familiar with certification procedures in this chapter.  Instructions for entering certification data on the BDN 317 (General Certification) screen is found in [Part 2: Chapter 6 - BDN Processing - General](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000077365?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)  paragraph 6.12.

**8.02  VA FORM 22-6553, VERIFICATION OF PURSUIT OF COURSE LEADING TO A STANDARD COLLEGE DEGREE** (See [Discontinuance of VA Form 22-6553, Verification of Pursuit of Course](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000076731?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) dated 1/16/07 and [Policy Advisory - VA Form 22-6553, Date signed](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000076514?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) dated 3/10/05)

---

**a.  Description and Conditions of Issuanc**

(1)  VA Form 22-6553 is a form mailed to schools periodically in chapter 32 and 35 cases for completion by the proper school official.  Payment to IHL (Institutions of Higher Learning) students continues through the termination date of the enrollment whether or not VA Form 22-6553 is returned (but see [subpars. d](#802d) and [e](#802e) below regarding delinquent accounts).

(2)  [BDN] issues VA Form 22-6553 for all non-lump-sum IHL accounts (type training A-graduate, or B-undergraduate) with the following exceptions:

(i)  [BDN] does not issue VA Form 22-6553 for a chapter 35 award which ends (or ended) in the current (or a prior) computer-processing month.

(ii)  [BDN] does not issue VA Form 22-6553 for a chapter 32 award that is processed in the next-to-last month of the enrollment period or later.

(iii)  [BDN] does not issue VA Form 22-6553 for enrollment periods of 90 days or less.  An "enrollment period", in this context, is the period from DLC (Date Last Certified) through the date preceding an intervening no-rate period of at least a calendar month or the final no-rate date,       whichever is earlier.

(iv)  [BDN does not issue VA Form 22-6553 for chapter 30 or 1606 cases.  Chapter 30 requires a monthly certification from all students.  (See [Part 5: Chapter 6 - Certifications](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000077042?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)  paragraph 6.03.)  Chapter 1606 will require monthly certifications from all students.

**b.**  Generation and Distribution of VA Form 22-6553

(1)  [BDN] generates the verification data printed on VA Form 22-6553 as follows:

*NOTE:  For the purposes of this section, BIG PAY (ch. 32) and Cycle 0 (ch. 35) are equivalent points in time.  Each is the computer-processing run that releases recurring payments due on the 1st day of every month.*

*(i)  Cycle 0 (BIG PAY) of the next-to-last month of enrollment periods of more than 90 days.  The verification data generated covers the period from DLC through the end of the term or the date preceding the intervening no-rate period.*

**(ii)  Cycle 0 (BIG PAY) of May for accounts in which the DLC is January or earlier and the next no-rate date is in August or later.  The verification data generated under this criterion will cover the period from DLC through April 30.**

*(2)  [Figures 8.02](#f802) and [8.03](#f803) illustrate generation of verification data printed by the system on VA Form 22-6553 based on original or reentrance award processing only.  Note that the processing cycle of the award is as much a factor as the award's beginning and ending dates.*

| CYCLE  OR DATE  AWARD  PROCESSED | BEGINNING  DATE (DLC) | ENDING DATE  (NO-RATE) | CYCLE  OR DATE  DATA  GENERATED | BEGINNING  DATE  ON FORM | ENDING  DATE  ON FORM |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
Data printed on VA Form 22-6553

| [0 May 2001 or earlier | 09-13-00 | 06-16-01 | 0 May 2001 | 09-13-00 | 06-15-01 |
| 1 May 2001 | 09-13-00 | 06-16-01 | 1 May 2001 | 09-13-00 | 06-15-01 |
| 0 June 2001 or later | 09-13-00 | 06-16-01 | NO |  |  |
| Any | 03-15-00 | 06-13-01] | NO |  |  |

**Figure 8.02.  Verification of Pursuit (Original or Reentrance Award**—**Chapter 35)**

---

| CYCLE  OR DATE  AWARD  PROCESSED | BEGINNING  DATE(DLC) | ENDING DATE  (NO-RATE) | CYCLE  OR DATE  DATA  GENERATED | BEGINNING  DATE  ON FORM | ENDING  DATE  ON FORM |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
Data printed on VA Form 22-6553

| April or earlier | 09-13-00 | 06-16-01 | BIG PAY  May 2001 | 09-13-00 | 06-15-01 |
| BIG PAY May or Later | 09-13-00 | 06-16-01] | NO |  |  |

**Figure 8.03.  Verification of Pursuit (Original or Reentrance Award**—**Chapter 32)**

---

3)  [Figure 8.04](#f804) illustrates the effect of an amended award (transaction 14) on the generation of verification data printed by the system on VA Form 22-6553.  Note that the critical processing period is the next to last month. 

(4)  [BDN] prints VA Form 22-6553 for the appropriate chapter 35 running awards immediately after cycle 1 of each month, with the verification data generated beginning cycle 2 of the previous month through cycle 1 of the current month.  The forms are then mailed to the schools once a month.

| AWARD  CYCLE | AWD  TRANS | BEGIN  DATE  (DLC) | END  ("NONE")  DATE | FORM  DATA  (CYCLE  OR DATE) | FORM  BEGIN  DATE | FORM  END  DATE |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
Verification of Pursuit (Amended Award—Chapters 32 and 35)

| [3 Aug 99 | 12C | 09-13-99 | 06-16-00 | BIG PAY or |  |  |
| 5 Apr 00 | 14C | 09-05-99 | 06-16-00 | 0 May 00 | 09-13-99 | 06-15-00**1** |
| 3 Aug 99 | 12C | 09-13-99 | 06-16-00 | BIG PAY or |  |  |
| 5 Apr 00 | 14C | 09-13-99 | 06-09-00 | 0 May 00 | 09-13-99 | 06-08-00 |
| 3 Aug 99 | 12C | 09-13-99 | 06-16-00 | BIG PAY or |  |  |
| 5 Apr 00 | 14C | 09-13-99 | 07-28-00 | 0 Jun 00 | 09-13-99 | 07-27-00 |
| 3 Aug 99 | 12C | 09-13-99 | 06-16-00 | BIG PAY or |  |  |
| 5 Apr 00 | 14C | 09-13-99 | 08-25-00 | 0 May 00 | 09-13-99 | 04-30-00 |
|  |  |  |  | 0 Jul 00 | 05-01-00 | 08-24-00 |
| 3 Aug 99 | 12C | 09-13-99 | 06-16-00 | NO |  |  |
| 5 Apr 00 | 14C | 09-13-99 | 03-30-00 |  |  | **2** |
| 3 Aug 99 | 12C | 09-13-99 | 06-16-00 |  |  |  |
| 5 Mar 00 | 14C | 09-13-99 | 04-28-00 | 5 Mar 00**3** | 09-13-99 | 04-27-00 |
| 3 Aug 99 | 12C | 09-13-99 | 06-16-00 | BIG PAY or |  |  |
|  |  |  |  | 0 May 00 | 09-13-99 | 06-15-00 |
| 1 May 00 | 14C | 09-13-99 | 06-16-00 | NO |  |  |
| 3 Aug 99 | 12C | 09-13-99 | 06-16-00 | BIG PAY or |  |  |
|  |  |  |  | 0 May 00 | 09-13-99 | 06-15-00 |
| 1 May 00 | 14C | 09-13-99 | 06-30-00 | NO |  |  |
| 3 Aug 99 | 12C | 09-13-99 | 06-16-00 | BIG PAY or |  |  |
|  |  |  |  | 0 May 00 | 09-13-99 | 06-15-00**4** |
| 1 May 00 | 14C | 09-13-99 | 07-07-00 | BIG PAY or |  |  |
|  |  |  |  | 0 Jun 00 | 09-13-99 | 07-06-00**5** |
| 3 Aug 99 | 12C | 09-13-99 | 06-16-00 | BIG PAY or |  |  |
|  |  |  |  | 0 May 00 | 09-13-99 | 06-15-00**4** |
| 5 May 00 | 14C | 09-13-99 | 08-25-00 | BIG PAY or |  |  |
|  |  |  |  | 0 Jul 00 | 09-13-99 | 08-24-00**5]** |

**Figure 8.04.  Verification of Pursuit (Amended Award**—**Chapters 32 and 35)**

1  An amended award with an earlier beginning date does not change DLC to an earlier date.  
2  Amended award was retroactive—certification assumed.  
3  Certification assumed for chapter 32—VA Form 22-6553 not issued.  
4  Transaction code 14C will not lift the certification control indicator (see [subpars.  d](#802d) and [e](#802e) below).  
5  Regardless of the order of processing, certifications will be accepted.

---

(5)  [BDN] prints VA Form 22-6553 for the appropriate chapter 32 running awards immediately after BIG PAY each month, with the verification data generated from the first Benefit Daily run (see [Part 2 Chapter 1 - Computer Processing Concepts](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000078763?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) paragraph 1.13) of the previous month through BIG PAY of the current month.  The forms are then   mailed to the schools once a month.

(6)  [BDN] generates a summary report for each RPO, Special Audit of School Codes, showing the total number of certification forms produced for each matched facility code, and a listing of file numbers with accompanying names that did not match an existing facility code. The liaison activity  will correct forms with unmatched facility codes and send them to the proper school.

**c.**  Changes in Enrollment Data Reported

(1)  [RPOs should ensure that VA Forms 22-6553 are sent to the proper activity for processing.  Send forms showing "no change" to the appropriate RPO activity.  Send forms with "changes" directly to the RPO Education Division.]

(2)  Upon receipt of a VA Form 22-6553 showing a "change," the adjudicator [ ] will review the form and MINQ screen(s) to determine if the claimant's folder should be pulled.  The adjudicator will take any appropriate award or developmental action.  (See [[par. 8.03A](#803A)] for processing notices of    reduction or termination.)

**d.**  Delinquent Verifications—**Chapter 35**

(1)  When a VA Form 22-6553 is issued, regardless of the conditions of issuance, a control indicator will be set in the [BDN] master record.  The computer-processing month and year are established as issuance indicators.  These indicators are cleared or removed when processing    returned VA Forms 22-6553 with a transaction code 35I (Lift IHL Control), an amended award transaction 14C, or a reentrance transaction code 12C. 

(2)  Payment to IHL students will continue through the termination date of the enrollment regardless of whether VA Form 22-6553 is returned. However, each month the system reviews all records with IHL control indicators set during the special no input cycle to determine if VA Form 22-6553 has been returned, and if a follow-up message is in order.  See  [Part 7: Chapter 5 - Notice of Exception Processing](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073754?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) for information concerning any messages.

**e.**  Delinquent Verifications—**Chapter 32**

(1) When [BDN] issues VA Form 22-6553, regardless of the conditions of issuance, a control indicator will be set in the master record.  The computer -processing month and year (certification issue date) are also established as issuance indicators.  These indicators are cleared or removed upon processing of the returned VA Form 22-6553 as follows:  a transaction code 35S (certification of IHL enrollment using the CERT [Certification)] command on the [BDN] 317, General Certification, screen), a reentrance transaction code 12C, or an amended award transaction 14C when that award is processed in the next-to-last month of the enrollment period or later.

(2)  Payment to IHL students will continue through the termination date of the enrollment whether or not VA Form 22-6553 is returned.  However, each month the system reviews all records with IHL control indicators set during BIG PAY to determine if VA Form 22-6553 has been returned and if a follow-up message is in order.  See [Part 6: Chapter 5 - Notice of Exception Processing](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073589?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) for information concerning any messages.

**8.03  VA FORM 22-8979, STUDENT VERIFICATION OF ENROLLMENT**

---

*[NOTE 1:  VA Form 22-8979 is used for both IHL and NCD verification of enrollment for chapter 30 and for NCD enrollments for chapters 32 and 35.  For topics unique to chapter 30, see* *[Part 5: Chapter 6 - Certifications](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000077042?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&).*

*NOTE 2:  VA Form 22-8979 (or an electronic version of this form) will be used for both IHL and NCD verification of enrollment for chapter 1606 and chapter 35.  This will be added as soon as programming can be done.]*

**a.  General.**  [In most situations, VA must receive a student verification of enrollment on a monthly basis for NCD courses (type training C, D, F, H, and I) before paying a student for his or her training.  The verification is completed by the claimant. 

(1)  Before September 1, 1984, chapter 32 and 35 attendance in NCD courses and farm cooperative courses were certified on a quarterly basis.

(2)  Monthly verifications are not required for chapter [32 or 35 students pursuing NCD courses on a less than one-half time basis ([38 CFR 21.4203(f)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14203)[(1)(i)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14203)).  In certain instances, BDN may issue a chapter 35 verification when one is not required.  (See [subpar. i (2)](#803i2)).

(3)  BDN will not issue a verification in chapter 30 and 35 lump-sum cases.] 

**b.**  **Frequency of Issuing Payments**

(1)  Advance Payment.  A student will be paid an advance payment according to the conditions described in  [Part 4: Chapter 10 - Advance and Special Payments](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073602?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) paragraph 10.02.  Once the advance payment has been made, later payments will depend on the receipt of required verification of enrollment.

[EXAMPLE:  An advance payment is made for the period from September 6, 1999, through October 31, 1999.  VA Form 22-8979 covering the period from September 6, 1999, through November 30, 1999 will be issued at the end of November.  Payment for the month of November will be released only when a verification covering the period through November 30, 1999, is processed.]

(2)  Non-Advance and Recurring Payments.  [If VA Form 22-8979 is required, BDN] does not issue recurring monthly payments or payment for a stub month without a verification to cover the period.

[EXAMPLE:  An award is processed in September for the period from September 6, 1999, through May 12, 2000.  VA Form 22-8979 covering the period from September 6, 1999, through September 30, 1999, will be issued at the end of the month of September and payment for September will be released only after receipt of September's verification.  Subsequent payments will be released only after verifications have been received.]

**c.  Frequency of Issuing Verifications.** A student's verification of enrollment may be issued at any time during the month, dictated by the processing of a previous transaction and the effective date of an award.  (For ch. 30, see [Part 5: Chapter 6 - Certifications](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000077042?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) paragraph 6.04)

(1)  Initial Verification

(i) Advance Payment.  A verification will not be issued until the advance payment control is cleared.  Normally, [BDN] will issue verifications at the end of the third month of enrollment.  If the term ends during the third month, [BDN] issues the verification at the end of the second month if VA Form 22-1999V, Certification of Delivery of Advance Payment and Enrollment, has been received and processed.  (See [Part 4: Chapter 10 - Advance and Special Payments](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073602?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)  paragraph 10.11 for advance payment procedures.)

[EXAMPLE:  An advance payment award has been processed for the term from September 6, 1999, through June 9, 2000.  VA Form 22-8979 covering the period from September 6, 1999, through November 30, 1999, will be issued at the end of November (i.e., from December's cycle 0 or BIG PAY), if VA Form 22-1999V has been returned.]

(ii)  Non-Advance Payment.  Release of the initial verification will depend upon when [BDN] processes the award transaction.  

A.  If an award is processed during the initial month of the award period through cycle 0 or BIG PAY, then [BDN] will issue VA Form 22-8979 at the end of the initial month.

[EXAMPLE:  An award for the term from September 6, 1999, through June 9, 2000, is processed during September processing (or no later than October's cycle 0 or BIG PAY).  A verification covering the period from September 6, 1999, through September 30, 1999, will be issued at the end of September (i.e., from October's cycle 0 or BIG PAY processing).]

B.  If an award is processed with a beginning date in any month before the current processing month, [BDN] will issue the verification immediately. The verification will cover the period from the enrollment's beginning date through the end of the current month.

[EXAMPLE:  Using the same enrollment dates cited in the example in subparagraph 1 above, an award processed during a November cycle, or Chapter 32 Benefit Daily, (or no later than December's cycle 0 or BIG PAY) will result in the immediate issuance of a verification covering the period from September 6, 1999, through November 30, 1999.]

C.  [BDN will not issue a verification when the Education Division processes a chapter 32 or 35 award with an effective date more than 5 months in the past.  Instead, BDN] will generate one of two messages.  [ ]

I.  For chapter 32 awards, [BDN] will generate a NOE (Notice of Exception) bearing message code 8001, INFO—CAN'T ISSUE C/A FOR PERIOD BEG DATE XX/XX/XX END DATE XX/XX/XX.  RPO personnel must obtain and process the necessary attendance information to   effect release of payment.

II.  For chapter 35 awards, [BDN] will generate VA Form 20-8270a, Education Master Record—Audit Writeout, bearing message code 943,  CANNOT ISSUE CERT OF ATT/TNG FOR (beginning date—ending date).  The necessary attendance information must again be obtained and processed before payment can be released.  Destroy NOE's and audit writeouts in accordance with RCS (Reports Control Schedule) VB-1, part I, item 08-041.000.

(2)  Recurring Verification.  After processing the initial verification, the following two actions occur:

(i)  Payment.  [BDN] will release payment immediately for the period verified less any ADVANCE PAYMENT amount already paid.

(ii) Release of Verifications.  The release will depend upon when the previous verification was processed.  If it is processed during the current month, [BDN] will issue the verification for the current month at the end of the month (i.e., during the next cycle 0 or BIG PAY processing). If the verification is processed after cycle 0 or BIG PAY of the second month following issuance, [BDN] will issue another verification immediately after processing the first verification.  The second verification will cover the period from the first day of the previous month to the end of the current month.

**d.  [Changes in Enrollment Reported By Claimant.** See [paragraph 8.03A](#803A).]

**e.  Delinquent Accounts**—**Chapter 30.**  (See  [Part 5: Chapter 6 - Certifications](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000077042?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), paragraph 6.09.)

**f.  Delinquent Accounts**—**Chapter 32**

(1)  If 3 months have passed since VA Form 22-8979 was issued, [BDN] will issue a one-time delinquent verification letter to the claimant.  A file copy of this letter is not issued.

(2)  If 4 months have passed since VA Form 22-8979 was issued, [BDN] will suspend the account automatically.  [BDN will send a discontinuance letter to the claimant with a file copy to the RPO Education Division.]  The processing of a verification transaction for an automatically suspended account will result in removal of the suspense, release of payment due, and issuance of another verification, if in order.

(3) If 6 months have passed since the issuance of VA Form 22-8979, [BDN will terminate the account automatically effective DLC and an overpayment will be established if a verification has not been returned for an ADVANCE PAYMENT case.  BDN will issue a termination letter to the claimant with a file copy to the RPO.]  Receipt of a verification after termination will require the processing of a reentrance or amended award to reactivate the account and process the verification.

**g.  Delinquent Accounts**—**Chapter 35**

(1)  If 2 months have passed since the issuance of VA Form 22-8979, [BDN] automatically suspends the account effective DLP (Date of Last Payment) and issues a letter to the claimant.  A file copy for the RPO is not generated.  The processing of a verification transaction will result in the removal of the suspense, release of payment due, and issuance of another verification, if in order.

(2)  If 5 months have passed since the issuance of VA Form 22-8979, [BDN] will terminate the account automatically effective DLC.  [BDN will issue a letter to the claimant with a copy to the RPO Education Division.]  Verification information submitted after termination will require the processing of a reentrance or amended award in order to process the verification information.

**h.  Delinquent Accounts**—**Chapter [1606.** (See TG (Training Guide) 22-99-5.)

**i.  Special Considerations for Monthly Verification**

(1)  [Amending Lump Sum Awards.]  The Education Division should not change a chapter 35 award for which lump-sum payment has been made with an amended award transaction unless a lump-sum payment is no longer in order.  This type of case should be processed as a combined stop and reentrance action.  Failure to process the award properly could lead to the requirement for monthly verification, which would be in direct violation of [38 CFR 21.4203(f)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14203).  [For chapter 30 procedures, see [Part 05, Chapter 30. Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000076293?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) paragraph 4.14]

*NOTE:  The chapter 32 program does not permit lump-sum payment.*

[EXAMPLE:  A lump-sum payment in the amount of $400 has already been issued to a claimant pursuing less than half-time training for the term June 1, 2000, through August 31, 2000.  The school submits notification that the tuition and fees are $450.  Prepare a stop and reentrance action to adjust total charges.  DLC and DLP will be the end of the term.  If erroneously prepared as an amended award, DLC and DLP will revert to the first day of the current month and the education system will demand monthly verifications.]

(2)  [Handling Chapter 35 Students Exempt from Verifications.]  Chapter 35 students exempt from the verification process (see [subpar. a(2)](#803a2)) with an award exceeding 5 months in length will automatically receive a monthly verification.  In such cases, the adjudicator should notify the claimant that he or she need not return the verification.  [The RPO should also] take the following actions:

(i)  Establish a monthly diary for recurring monthly verification processing.

(ii)  Review the [BDN] M21 screen for every diaried record to verify the continued need for monthly verifications on the last day of each month, or, no later than the first work day of the following month.

(iii)  Process a verification on [BDN].

(iv)  Reestablish a diary for the following month to be verified.  Maintain all diaries in accordance with RCS VB-1, part I, item 13-010.050.

**8.03A  PROCESSING ENROLLMENT CHANGES REPORTED BY STUDENT** (See RPO 22-07-01 letter)

---

**a.  General (Changes in Enrollment Reported By Student).** Upon receipt of enrollment changes, to include receipt of a VA Form 22-8979 or the same information submitted electronically, where the student reports a change (increase or decrease) in the number of days or clock or credit hours of scheduled attendance, the adjudicator should first check the master record to determine if the school has already submitted the change in hours. 

(1)  If the RPO has already processed the change in hours, enter the verification data on the 317 screen which is processed with the amended award.  Scan the verification document into the student's electronic TIMS (The Imaging Management System) folder.

(2)  If the school has not reported the change in hours, see [subparagraph b](#803Ab) below.

*NOTE:  This same procedure applies to enrollment information that the student submits using different means such as telephone, Fax, or Internet.*

**b**.     **Reduction or Termination of Training Reported by Student.**  Determine the beginning date of the term and the ending date of the drop period. 

*NOTE:  The school approval file, which may include this information, is available using OLAF (On-Line Approval File).*

(1)  If the reduction occurs after the ending date of the institution's drop period (but not more than 30 days after the beginning of the term), take the following actions:

(i)  Adjust the award to reflect the new training time effective the beginning date of the term as if the claimant has received non-punitive grades;

(ii)  Process the verification of enrollment if continuing benefits; and,

(iii)  Notify the claimant that his or her award has been adjusted retroactively to the beginning date of the term and request mitigating circumstances.  Control the case with a pending supplemental EPC (End Product Code) for receipt of the school's enrollment change.

*NOTE:  Mitigating circumstances are required in cases where the 6-credit exclusion does not apply.*

(2)  If the reduction occurs before the ending date of the institution's drop period (but not more than 30 days after the beginning of the term), take the following actions:

(i)  Adjust the award effective the appropriate date (see [Part 4: Chapter 11 - Enrollment Adjustments](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073644?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)  paragraph 11.10) to reflect the new training time;

(ii)  Process the verification of enrollment; and,

(iii)  Establish a supplemental EPC for receipt of the school's enrollment change.  Do not develop for mitigating circumstances. 

*NOTE:  If the school's enrollment information is received showing that mitigating circumstances are for consideration (e. g., actual withdrawal after the end of the drop period), retroactively adjust the award to the beginning date of the term and notify the claimant of the necessity of submitting mitigating circumstances.*

(3)  If the RPO does not receive revised enrollment information from the school certifying official (VA Form 22-1999b, Notice of Change in Student Status, VACERT or VAnetCert)] is not received by the time the supplemental EPC (in subpar. (1) or (2) above) matures, contact the school requesting the information. 

(4)  When the revised enrollment information is received, take appropriate award action.  The changes reported by the school reflect the student's official status and take precedence over the student's verification.

(5)  If the revised enrollment information is not received within 30 days of contacting the school as described in [subparagraph (3)](#803Ab3), follow up periodically to the school.  The EPC must remain pending until the issue is resolved.

**c.  Increase in Training Reported By Student.**  First, process the verification to release payment at the existing rate.  Then, set up a pending supplemental EPC for receipt of enrollment information to confirm the increase in credit or clock hours. Do not process an increase until a confirmation has been received from the school.

(1)  If the enrollment information is not received by the time the supplemental EPC matures, call the school or send the school a dictated letter requesting one.  Send a copy of this letter to the claimant.

(2)  When the enrollment information is received, take appropriate award action.

(3)  If the enrollment information is not received within 30 days of the contact or letter described in subparagraph (1), disallow the claim for increase. Send a copy of the disallowance letter to the school.

**d.  Notification From School of Changes in Credit Hours Which do not Affect Full Time Payment.**  (See [Part 4: Chapter 11 - Enrollment Adjustments](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073644?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) paragraph 11.14b.)

**e.  Phone Calls.**   [RPOs will use their own judgment regarding accepting a claimant’s telephone request to process their verifications of attendance.]

**f.  Mid-Month Verifications.**  In certain instances, a verification form is issued for a partial month of training, and before the RPO processes the form, the veteran is awarded benefits for the remainder of the month.  To avoid unnecessary processing difficulties, the RPO will consider the entire month verified if the student signed the form on the last day of the month or later.

 

**8.04  VA FORM 22-6553b, CERTIFICATION OF LESSONS COMPLETED**

---

**a.  General.**  VA Form 22-6553b is completed at the end of each quarter by the claimant to reflect the number of correspondence lessons completed and by the school to reflect the number of lessons actually serviced.  The yearly quarters are from January 1 through March 31; April 1 through June 30; July 1 through September 30; and October 1 through December 31.  VA Form 22-6553b processing is required to release payment to a student pursuing correspondence study. 

*NOTE:  BDN issuance and processing of correspondence certifications of lessons completed is available only for chapter 35.  [RPOs process new chapter 32 correspondence awards with certifications issued manually and returned upon completion to the RPO for processing.  Chapter 30 correspondence certifications are issued and processed by the RPOs.  The RPOs use a PC program to print the information on these certifications.  Chapter 1606] correspondence certifications are issued and processed by the St. Louis RPO.*

**b.  Use of VA Form 22-6553b Mandatory.** The only exceptions to use of VA Form 22-6553b are described in [paragraph 8.09b](#809b). 

**c.  Issuance of VA Form 22-6553b - Certification Periods**

(1)  Correspondence Award Effective During Prior Quarter.  If an original or reentrance chapter 35 correspondence award is effective during a prior quarter, [BDN] issues a VA Form 22-6553b covering the period from the date of the enrollment to the end of the preceding quarter automatically when the Education Division processes the award.  If [BDN] issues the initial certification form during the special no-input cycle of the last month of the current quarter, the period covered will be from the date of enrollment through the current quarter.  Chapter 30 PC and manual processing for the other benefits is similar.

(2)  Correspondence Award Effective During Current Quarter.  If an original or reentrance chapter 35 correspondence award is effective during the current quarter, [BDN] issues a VA Form 22-6553b covering the period from the date of the enrollment to the end of the current quarter in the no-input cycle of the last month of the current quarter.  Chapter 30 PC and manual processing for the other benefits is similar.

(3)  Subsequent Certifications.  [BDN] will generate and issue subsequent VA Forms 22-6553b for chapter 35 in the special no-input cycle of the last month of each quarter cycle (see schedule of operations in [Part 2 Chapter 1 - Computer Processing Concepts](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000078763?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) paragraph 1.13).  The certifications will cover the period from DLC to the end of the   current quarter.  PC and manual processing for the other benefits is similar.

(4)  Certification to Delimiting Date.  If a student's delimiting date falls within a quarter covered by a certification issued in accordance with the above, the preprinted ending date for the certification period will be the date immediately preceding the delimiting date (e.g., if the delimiting date is [June 1, 1999, VA Form 22-6553b will show a certification period ending date of May 31, 1999).]  Since the certification transaction will reject (chapter 35) if it reflects an ending date on or after the delimiting date, the proper ending date of the period to be certified must be shown on those VA Forms 22-6553b which must issue from the RPO.  While it is, of course, important that any certification form issued reflect the proper certification period, it is particularly critical to the proper payment of benefits in delimiting date cases that the ending date be correctly shown.  It is VA policy that benefits may be paid for only those lessons completed and mailed to the school on or before midnight of the day immediately preceding the delimiting date (or, if such a day is a Federal holiday, on or before midnight of the first VA workday following the holiday). The student may be paid for such lessons, even if the school does not process and certify them to VA until after the delimiting date.  This applies ONLY to lessons completed by the student and mailed to the school before the delimiting date.

**d.  Changes in Enrollment Data Reported.** See [paragraph 8.10](#810). 

**e.  Delinquent Correspondence Certification.**  The following procedures apply to chapter 35.  PC and manual provisions for the other benefits is similar.

(1)  If a quarterly certification form is not received and processed before the special no-input cycle of the sixth month following DLP or DLA (Date of Last Activity), for chapter 35 only, BDN will suspend the account automatically and issue a one-time delinquent certification letter in chapter 35  cases. 

(2)  If a quarterly certification is not received before the special no-input cycle of the 10th month following DLP or DLA, [BDN] will terminate the account automatically and issue a discontinuance letter to the claimant. 

(3)  The processing of a certification of lessons completed for a suspended account will result in its removal from suspended status and release of any payments due.  (The processing of a retroactive stop payment transaction (code 09V) or notice of death transaction (code 28) will take  precedence over the automatic suspension and termination procedures.) 

(4)  If the claimant replies to the delinquent letter by furnishing all the required information, including the school's verification of lessons serviced, it will not be necessary to require completion of VA Form 22-6553b.  Instead, accept the necessary data furnished by the student and school. 

(5)  If the student furnishes the required certification after the account has been terminated (type E master record), an amended award with a certification transaction code 35C is required to reactivate the account and restore or release any payment to which the student may be entitled. Certification data must be entered separately.  [See TG 22-99-2, for the CHAIRS (Chapter 35 Alternate Input Replacement System) input.]

 

**8.05  VA FORM 22-6553c, MONTHLY CERTIFICATION OF FLIGHT TRAINING**

---

*NOTE:  This section applies to chapters 30, 32, and [1606 only.  Flight training is not available for chapter 35.  Chapter 30 flight certifications are processed by the RPOs.  Chapter 32 and 1606 flight certifications are processed by the Buffalo RPO.  Currently, flight cases are processed entirely outside BDN], using manual procedures or a PC (chapter 30).*

**a.  General**

(1)  The student and flight school complete VA Form 22-6553c, Monthly Certification of Flight Training, each month to show the number of hours of flight instruction completed.  VA requires the form to release payment to a student pursuing flight training.

(2)  If [the RPO receives a flight certification and does not have an award, that activity] will prepare an Optional Form 41, Routing and Transmittal Slip, noting the lack of an award, and forward it with the flight certification to the RPO Education Division.  If an enrollment certificate is not in the   claimant's folder, the Education Division will prepare a dictated letter to the student with a copy to the school.  Explain that VA may not pay for training until it receives a properly completed enrollment certification.  Include a statement of procedural and appellate rights with the letter.

**b.  Simultaneous Mailing of Award and Certification of Flight Training.**If enrollment information is on file or received, and award action is in order, combine the award and certification actions to expedite the payment.  For chapter 30, [use the chapter 30 PC payment system.  For chapter 32, see [Part 4: Chapter 12 - Out-of-System Award Processing](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073667?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) paragraph 12.11c(3).  For chapter 1606, see [M22-4 Part 8: Chapter 3 - Eligibility Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073974?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)  

**c.  Issuance of Forms to School.**  [Each ELR (Education Liaison Representative) will supply flight schools under his or her jurisdiction with VA Forms] 22-6553c.  The schools use the forms, when needed, to certify jointly with the student, the type and cost of training.  Schools should complete the certification at the end of each month during which the student trained.  VA does not issue flight certification forms on a monthly or quarterly basis as it does for other types of training.

**d.  Delinquent Flight Certification**

(1)  If VA does not receive a flight certification before the third month following DLC or DLP, a delinquent certification letter will be issued. For example, if the DLC is May 1, VA will issue the delinquent certification letter in August.

(2)  If VA does not receive a flight certification before the fourth month following DLC or DLP, the record will be suspended and a discontinuance letter will be issued.  Continuing the above example, if the DLC is May 1, the record will be suspended and a discontinuance letter will be issued in September.

(3)  If VA does not receive a flight certification before the third month following suspension, the record will be terminated effective DLC.  Continuing the above example, if the DLC is May 1, the award will be terminated in December.

(4)  Processing a flight certification for a suspended record results in the removal of the suspension and release of payments due.  Processing of a retroactive stop or a notice of death takes precedence over the suspend and stop procedures.

(5)  If the student replies to the delinquent certification letter by furnishing all the required information and the flight school's certifying official confirms the hours of training and charges, do not request a VA Form 22-6553c.  Accept the information furnished by the student and flight school and send it to Finance.

(6)  If VA receives a flight certification after the account has been terminated because of delinquent certification, prepare an amended award. [(For chapter 30, use the chapter 30 PC payment system.  For chapter 32 and 1606, see [Part 4: Chapter 12 - Out-of-System Award Processing](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073667?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) paragraph12.11.  Forward the award and the certification to Finance to reactivate the record.

**8.06  MONTHLY CERTIFICATION OF ON-THE-JOB AND APPRENTICESHIP TRAINING**

---

**a.  General.**  Beginning November 21, 2017, School Certifying Officials (SCOs) are responsible for submitting the trainee’s hours to the VA. The trainee’s signature is no longer needed. [(PL 115-89)](https://www.congress.gov/115/plaws/publ89/PLAW-115publ89.pdf) 

VA has determined the preferred method to receive enrollment information from schools and training facilities is VA-ONCE an electronic certification system. **VA-ONCE will be replaced in 2023 by the Enrollment Manager which will become the only method for certification.**

*Note: The MOU must be signed by a school official who has the authority to enter into a contract between the institution and VA.*

*Note: In lieu of submitting an electronic VA Form 22-6553d-1, the SCO may submit via Ask VA (AVA) inquiry system. In that system, a separate inquiry is required for each trainee. For each trainee, the VA Form 22-6553d-1 must be submitted as a PDF document with the SCO signature on the form. **However, this option will be revoked sometime in 2023 when the Enrollment Manager is fully operational.***

**b.  Issuance of Certification and Payment.**  A VA Form 22-6553d, or its equivalent, is required to release payment.  However, in chapter 35 cases an original or reentrance apprenticeship or other on-the-job training award will release payment for the stub month without any certification having been received.  (This release of payment without certification does not occur in chapters 30, 32, and [1606].)   BDN issues a VA Form 22-6553d with the first partial check.  The form covers the period from the beginning date of the award through the end of the current processing month, provided that this period does not exceed 6 months.  If the certification exceeds 6 months (or partial months),  BDN will not issue a VA Form 22-553d; instead, a computer message is generated with routing to the [appropriate RPO] activity for action.  Upon receipt of the first certification, payment for the period in excess of the stub month covered by the certification is released.  Recurring payments are then released only upon the processing of a completed VA Form 22-6553d or its equivalent. 

**c.  (See RPO Letter**[22-06-12](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000062385?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)**dated July 14, 2006) Change in Wage Rate.**  Upon receipt of a certification showing a change in the claimant's wage rate not in accordance with the training agreement, the RPO activity will send the certification to the Education Division to determine if the journeyman wage rate has been reached. 

(1)  If the rate on the certification equals or exceeds the journeyman wage rate shown in the claimant's folder, and the certification shows the effective date that the claimant reached the journeyman wage rate, terminate the running award.  For chapter 35 cases, use the CERT command, complete  the 317 screen and enter "Y" in TERMINATE.  File VA Form 22-6553d in the claimant's folder, and notify the claimant by dictated letter of the reason for the termination. In non-chapter 35 cases, make appropriate adjustments in the manual or PC system.

(2)  If the rate on the certification equals or exceeds the journeyman wage rate shown in the claimant's folder, but the certification does not show the effective date that the claimant reached the journeyman wage rate, suspend the running award.  For chapter 35 cases, use the SUSP (Suspend) command.  For non-chapter 35 cases, suspend benefits using the manual or PC system.  Send the claimant a dictated letter (with copies to the training establishment and the liaison activity) requesting that he or she state the date he or she first received the journeyman rate.  Establish a 30-day control.  If the claimant furnishes the date, terminate the award as of that date.  For chapter 35 cases, process VA Form 22-6553d as a quit certification and make a copy for the claimant's folder.  For non-chapter 35 cases, terminate benefits in the manual or PC system.  Notify the claimant by dictated letter.  If no response is received after 30 days, request the liaison activity to ask the SAA (State Approving Agency) to obtain the necessary information. 

(3)  If the rate on the certification indicates a wage increase or decrease which is not in accordance with the training agreement but is still less than the journeyman wage, send a copy of the certification to the liaison activity.  Ask the liaison activity to obtain from the SAA the reasons for the wage increase or decrease and a new wage schedule for retaining in the claimant's folder.  Return the certification to the Finance activity for issuing the payment by normal processing.  Payment should not be delayed pending the receipt of the information from the SAA.  Establish a 90-day control for receipt of the SAA information, unless the decrease is such that it appears the approval might have to be withdrawn.  In that case, establish a 30-day control. 

**d.  Less Than 120 Hours Worked.**  If the month(s) being certified show less than 15 units (120 hours) worked, see [Part 7: Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073737?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) paragraph 4.15, for restoration of entitlement in chapter 35 cases only.

**e.  Delinquent Training Certification**

*NOTE:  Appropriate delinquent training certification actions are taken by [BDN in chapter 35 cases, by the RPOs in certain chapter 32 cases, by the RPOs in chapter 30 cases, and by the Buffalo Finance activity in chapter 1606] cases.*

(1)  If a training certification is not received by the special no-input cycle of the third month following DLP or DLA, BDN will suspend the account automatically effective DLC and issue a one-time delinquent certification letter.

(2)  If a training certification is not received by the special no-input cycle in the fourth month following suspension, BDN will terminate the account automatically effective DLC.  A copy of the termination letter is provided to the RPO.  File the termination letter in the claimant's folder.

(3)  The processing of a certification for a suspended master record will result in removal of the suspense and release of payments due after offset of any existing overpayment.  Also, the processing of a retroactive stop payment transaction (code 09V) or notice of death (code 28) will take precedence over the automatic suspense and termination procedures. 

(4)  If the claimant replies to the delinquent certification letter by furnishing all the required information, including verification of hours worked made by the training establishment, it will not be necessary to require completion of VA Form 22-6553d.  Instead, accept the necessary data furnished by the student and training establishment and send it to the Finance activity. 

(5)  If the required certification or equivalent is furnished after the account has been terminated (type E master record), a reentrance award (12C transaction effective the DLC termination date) with the certification data will be required to reactivate the account and restore or release any payment to which the claimant may be entitled. (See [Part 2: Chapter 6 - BDN Processing - General](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000077365?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) paragraphs 6.11 & 6.12.) 

**8.07  PERIODIC EDUCATION CERTIFICATION NOT OBTAINABLE**

---

Circumstances may exist in which the claimant may be entitled to education benefits, but required school certification showing such entitlement cannot be obtained.  This occurs in cases where the school or training establishment has ceased operation and its officials are not available or are unable to provide the proper certification data.  If this situation exists in an IHL case, the claimant's statement will be accepted when no contrary information is of record; for a non-IHL case, the following guidelines will apply with respect to required monthly certification of attendance, monthly hours worked, flight instruction received, or correspondence lessons completed and serviced: 

**a.**  When bona fide attempts to secure required certification have been unsuccessful, the student should submit to VA any documentation in his or her possession, or that may be extracted from school records, supportive of his or her declaration as to attendance, hours worked, flight instruction received, or lessons completed and serviced. 

**b**.  If additional VA development action would be unproductive and pose an unwarranted delay in payment, the student's certification, without facts to the contrary, will be accepted as valid. 

**c.** The Education Division will prepare a certification transaction, if required, in accordance with the data obtained.  This will not be necessary if a correspondence or flight training award must be prepared to authorize benefits.  See [Part 2: Chapter 6 - BDN Processing - General](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000077365?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) paragraph 6.12b, regarding combination award and certification action. 

(1)  If an award (other than flight) must be processed to effect payment, process the certification data and the award simultaneously on BDN. 

(2)  If the case is in a running-award status, code the 317 screen so as to reflect the date of last attendance, date last worked, date last flight instruction furnished, or date last lesson serviced as the effective date of course termination. 

**8.08  EXCESSIVE RATE LINES**

---

If an IHL or NCD award is processed and the number of rate lines exceeds the limitations of the certification form, BDN generates a VA Form 20-8270a, Master Record Writeout, for chapter 35 cases bearing the message 924, "EXCESSIVE NUMBER OF RATE LINES—ISSUE C/A."  For chapter 32, BDN generates an NOE with message code 8001, "INFO—CAN'T ISSUE C/A FOR PERIOD BEG DATE (MM-DD-YY) TO END DATE (MM-DD-YY)."  The RPO must secure the necessary verification data from the student and enter the verification in BDN.  For IHLs, the entire period of enrollment must be shown.  For NCDs, the period from DLC through the end of the month being certified must be shown. 

**8.09  ALTERNATE MEANS FOR SUBMITTING VERIFICATIONS OR CERTIFICATIONS**

---

**a.  Alternate Forms Available.**  Verifications and certifications are normally issued either by BDN, the Chapter 30 PC program, or manually.  The BDN generated version of a form is not available for stocking by stations.  However, stations can stock a printed version of the same form in certain instances if a station desires to use the form for reasons such as sending to a claimant if he or she reports loss of a certification form.  VA Form 22-6553b is generated by BDN but stations can order and stock VA Form 22-6553b-1, the printed version of the verification form.  The Chapter 30 PC program uses VA Forms 22-6553b-1, and 22-6553d-1, the printed versions of BDN generated forms.  [Stations can order VA Forms 22-6553b-1 and 22-6553d-1 from the depot.]

**b.  Exceptions to Mandatory Use of Verification or Certification Forms.**  Certain exceptions to mandatory use of a specific verification or certification form exist.  These include certification provisions found in [Part 4: Chapter 10 - Advance and Special Payments](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073602?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) paragraph 10.19 (special payment to accommodate bona fide financial need); and [paragraph 8.07](#807) (delinquent correspondence certifications and unobtainable certifications, respectively).  Certification accepted via telephone, when appropriate, to resolve a VAI (Veterans Assistance Inquiry), is also exempt. 

**8.10  TERMINATION VERIFICATIONS OR CERTIFICATIONS**

---

If the student or school reports an interruption on a verification or certification form, which is then processed for termination ("quit" certification), the form or a photocopy will be scanned into the claimant's electronic folder as evidence of such termination.  Other changes noted on the verification or certification form will be referred, with the claimant's folder, to the Education Division for any necessary action.