# M22-4, Part 10, Compliance Survey. Chapter 07 - Reports and Correspondence.

**M22-4, Part 10, Compliance Survey. Chapter 07 - Reports and Correspondence.**

[7.01  General](#701)  
[7.02  VA Form 22-1934, Compliance Survey of Schools and Establishments Furnishing Education and Training](#702)  
[7.03  Narrative Report](#703)  
[7.04  Supporting Documentation](#704)  
[7.05  Correspondence to School or Training Establishment](#705)

**7.01 GENERAL**

---

---

**a**. Compliance survey reports determine if a school or training establishment is meeting the requirements of the law and regulations. Therefore, all areas reviewed during the compliance survey must be documented to the extent. Reports may be reviewed both within VA and by interested federal government elements outside VA, including General Accounting Office and the Justice Department.

**b**. The materials described in paragraphs [**7.02**](#702), [**7.03**](#703), and [**7.04**](#704) constitute a compliance survey report.

[**Go to Top**](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073927/M22-4,%20Part%2010,%20Compliance%20Survey.%20Chapter%2007%20-%20Reports%20and%20Correspondence.#top)

**7.02 VA FORM 22-1934, COMPLIANCE SURVEY OF SCHOOLS AND ESTABLISHMENTS FURNISHING EDUCATION AND TRAINING**

---

**a. General.** The VA Form 22-1934 is used to report official compliance activity for all GI Bill Educational and Training Institutions (ETI). Surveyors must accurately make entries in all applicable sections of the form. The purpose of the form is to provide statistical data and a summary of the types of discrepancies found, if any, as recorded on the compliance activity worksheet. Versions of on-line forms may be used. The following paragraphs provide guidance to filling out the form.  

**b. Name and Address of School or Training Establishment.** Enter the name and full physical address of the ETI.

**c. Facility Code.** Enter the facility code of the ETI being surveyed.

**d. Date of Last Approval.** Enter the effective date of the last approval accepted by the VA.

**e. Prior Survey Section:**

**1. Period Covered Through**. Enter the date from the prior survey Current Survey: Period Covered, Through date. If this is initial compliance activity, enter “Initial” or for online versions, check the initial box.

**f. Current Survey section:**

**1. Dates of Survey (From/Through).**  In the FROM box, enter the first date of the site visit.  In the THROUGH box, enter the date of the Exit Briefing.  

The Exit Briefing is the date that all the records have been reviewed and all questions have been answered. 

If the surveyor cannot finish the review onsite, then a status update may be given prior to the surveyor’s departure from the ETI.  Any briefing given prior to completing the review of all records and resolving all questions is a status update and not the official Exit Briefing. 

If a surveyor is conducting an Exit Briefing and the ETI offers new or additional documents, the Exit Briefing stops, and the meeting becomes a status update until the new document(s) and be reviewed.  

**Example** 1**:** On January 5, 2021, a surveyor is onsite and has reviewed all records. The surveyor conducted the Exit Briefing and left the ETI on January 5, 2021. The Exit Briefing date is January 5, 2021. 

**Example 2:** On January 5, 2021, a surveyor is onsite but was unable to complete the review of all records before departing the facility and returning to their office.  The surveyor provided a status update of issues identified thus far before departing the facility and completed the review of all records back at their office on January 6, 2021.  The Exit Briefing was provided the next day over the phone.  The Exit Briefing date is January 7, 2021.

**2. Period Covered (From/Through).** Enter the dates of the survey period.  See M22-4 Part 10 Chapter 3 for date determination.

**3. RO NO:**  Enter the regional office number from WEAMS Organizational Profile page.

**4. Enrolled Students.** Enter the number of students by benefit type that were enrolled at the facility at the beginning of the last term.

**5. Records Reviewed.** Enter the number of records that were reviewed for the survey by benefit type.

**6. Records With Discrepancy.** Enter number of records reviewed that had discrepancies by benefit type.

**7. Students Interviewed.** Enter the number of students interviewed by benefit type.

**8. Name and Title of Official(s) Contacted.** Enter the name and title of official(s) contacted during the survey.

**9. Prior Survey Completed:** Check the appropriate block for whether the prior survey was completed “On Site” or “Remote”.  Leave this section blank for an initial survey.

**10. Current Survey Completed:** Check the appropriate block for whether the current survey was completed “On Site” or “Remote”.

**11. Reason for Survey**: Check appropriate box. The “Other (specify)” option includes TRBR and RBS surveys.

**g. Schools Only Section:**

**1. Courses Offered:** Check the appropriate block that corresponds to the type of courses offered at a school.  Leave this section blank for OJT/ APP ETIs.

**2. Profit Status:** Check the appropriate block that corresponds to a school’s profit status.  Leave this section blank for OJT/ APP ETIs.

**3. Approval Status:** Check the appropriate block that corresponds to a school’s approval status.  Leave this section blank for OJT/ APP ETIs.

**h. Training Establishments Only Section**: Check the appropriate block that corresponds to the correct type of training establishment.  Leave this section blank for all schools.

**i. Areas of Review Section**: Make an entry under "FINDINGS" for all numbered or lettered lines.  Select “Yes” if the facility acted according to regulations, or “No” if there are findings of non-compliance. If the line does not apply, enter "NA".

**j. Attachments Section**: Select the appropriate boxes that correspond with the documents included with the compliance survey documents.

**k. Date Report Submitted.** Enter the date the report was submitted or follow the online procedure for submitting the form.

**l. Signature of Compliance Survey Specialist/or Name and Title of Other Reviewer:** Enter the printed name and signature of the compliance survey specialist.  If submitting the form online, follow the online procedure for submitting the form.

[**Go to Top**](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073927/M22-4,%20Part%2010,%20Compliance%20Survey.%20Chapter%2007%20-%20Reports%20and%20Correspondence.#top)  
 

**7.03 NARRATIVE REPORT**

---

**a. General.** The narrative report is the body of compliance survey findings. It should contain not only the facts identified during the compliance survey, but also observations and conclusions reached by survey specialist. Decisions, such as determinations concerning the need for a site visit or for expansion of the survey, must be included. Compliance survey narratives are internal VA documents and are subject to the provisions of both the Freedom of Information Act and the Privacy Act. They will not be routinely provided to facility officials or other individuals outside VA. However, brief passages of the report, describing particular discrepancies, may be included verbatim in correspondence to schools or SAAs. When an on-line version of VA Form 22-1934 is used, the narrative report may be produced as part of the same document. The narrative report consists of three sections.

**b. Section I - General.** Briefly describe the records which were reviewed and the reason for the review. Attach appropriate documentation to the compliance survey report if the reason is other than routine or follow-up, e.g., memo from Adjudication, letter from beneficiary. If remote review procedures were used for all or part of the survey, indicate the reasons. If simultaneous surveys of more than one type of training were conducted, indicate the facility code(s) for the other type(s) of training. List the names and titles of officials who were briefed before the review, whether conducted on site or not.

**c. Section II - Discrepancies.** Clearly and fully document, with specific information, the discrepancies found in individual cases and in general areas of review. (See subpar c and d below.) Use this documentation to list and evaluate discrepancies which have been identified during the compliance survey. For convenience, discrepancies may be grouped either by type of discrepancy or by individual trainee. In either case, they will be listed in line number order as they appear on VA Form 22-1934. The following format will be used:

(1). Type. Identify the type of each discrepancy by reference to its line number on VA Form 22-1934.

(2). Facts. Relate the findings and identify the beneficiary by name and claim number.

(3). Evaluation. State a conclusion as to the probable cause of the discrepancy.

(4). Recommendation. Recommend action(s) which if accomplished will correct the discrepancy.

**d. Section III - Summary.** Relate concisely all discussions with facility officials, agreements reached and actions taken during the survey, whether on site or remotely. List officials present at the Exit Briefing by title. In addition, summarize any assistance provided to the school such as discussions of laws, regulations, and procedures. Include other recommendations which were made and implemented during the survey. If VA Form 22-1919, Conflicting Interests Certification for Proprietary Schools Only (Chs. 32, 34, 35, and 36, Title 38, United States Code), was completed during the survey (see par 4.16), note that fact. Note whether personal contacts with VA beneficiaries were made in addition to the survey (see par 3.02 b), and summarize any significant results. Finally, recommend that the next survey be scheduled either routinely, or as a follow-up survey. If a follow-up survey is recommended, the interval should also be recommended, e.g., "within 6 months," "in the next fiscal year." While brevity is desirable, the summary must fully reflect the work done during the survey and include all items noted above.

[**Go to Top**](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073927/M22-4,%20Part%2010,%20Compliance%20Survey.%20Chapter%2007%20-%20Reports%20and%20Correspondence.#top)  
 

**7.04 SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION**

---

This section describes requirements and procedures for describing evidence of the findings from a compliance review in the final report and includes information on the following:

* Documenting Findings
* Worksheets
* Other Documentation

**a**. **Document Findings.** All findings, discovered during the survey, whether positive or negative, must be supported by appropriate notations on the compliance survey worksheets or in other working papers. Findings should include those that relate to each case reviewed as well as general areas of review, such as 85 percent enrollment restriction or charges for tuition and fees. These notations are used in preparing the survey narrative report as well as referrals to other station activities or the SAA for corrective action. If an incorrect report or certification was submitted by the school or training establishment, note the correct information as obtained from school records. If a report was not submitted by the school or training establishment, but school records indicate a report should have been submitted, e.g., change in credit hours, note all appropriate data which should have been furnished in the report. These notes should be organized and legible, so they may be used for school liability or other actions when required. A worksheet is needed on all student cases, and supporting evidence must be attached, regardless of if a discrepancy was found. 

**b**. **Worksheets.**  The following forms or worksheets will be used as supporting documentation:

* A standardized compliance survey worksheet
* Include an individual worksheet for each beneficiary in the survey sample.  Record all findings in the appropriate spaces on the worksheet. Findings recorded should include a full description of each discrepancy.  Review of all appropriate items for each type of training is required. (see Part 10 CH 3 and CH 4).
* Upon completion of the survey, the worksheet must become a part of the survey per paragraph 7.04(C).
* Worksheets and supporting documents should be grouped by beneficiary, arranged in a consistent order, and uploaded into Salesforce compliance survey file.

 **c. Other Documentation.** All supporting work papers and documentation (such as notes of survey findings, individual worksheet, student unofficial transcript, ledger, term registration, etc.) will be kept and uploaded to the Salesforce compliance survey file for all records reviewed. When a student interview is conducted, it must be documented and included in the narrative (see [**Part 10 CH 3.02, Figure 3.03**](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/article/554400000073640/M22-4-Part-10-Compliance-Survey-Chapter-03-Compliance-Survey-Procedures?SSO_STR=s2574f4dea15d7a07053cc2afb1eb2b12362f72a93&USE_PREVIEW=YES&UAC_CMD=YES&__eg_request_token__=73C0D367-2B2D-4AE1-9CA4-13BB19C426EA#302)is an example of questions).

1. VA Form 22-1919, Conflicting Interest Certification for Proprietary Schools pertains to approval criteria that is reviewed by an ELR and filed in a Salesforce approval file.  A **copy** of the form obtained as part of the compliance survey must be labeled as FYXX-Fac\_Code-Copy of 22-1919 and uploaded to the Salesforce compliance survey file as evidence of the review. Seeparagraph 4.16 for instructions on when to obtain this form.

[**Go to Top**](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073927/M22-4,%20Part%2010,%20Compliance%20Survey.%20Chapter%2007%20-%20Reports%20and%20Correspondence.#top)  
 

**7.05 CORRESPONDENCE**

---

**a**. A Findings Letter is an official correspondence from the VA to the ETI that explains the results of the survey.  The Findings Letter must be sent through Salesforce within 30 days of the Exit Briefing and be in Adobe PDF format.  The Findings Letter is a two-part document that consists of a cover letter and a copy of the Narrative with some sensitive information removed.  The cover letter must address the requirements of paragraph b & c.  *The copy of the Narrative sent to the ETI should contain all the sections including discrepancies but must not contain dollar amounts for over or under payments, references to fraud, OIG, potential school liability, or other investigative agencies.*

**b**. Refer discrepancies involving violations of the conditions or criteria for approval to the SAA for information or for action. Inform the school of these referrals, but do not discuss the discrepancies.

**c** If discrepancies would have resulted in a preliminary determination that a substantial pattern of overpayments exists, except that this was the first occurrence and the ETI had not been previously notified in writing (see par. 5.02), the letter must notify the school or training establishment that:

(1) Overpayments were found in a substantial proportion of the cases reviewed;

(2) If this occurs on a future compliance survey, it may constitute a substantial pattern of overpayments; and

(3) A finding of a substantial pattern of overpayments could result in suspension or discontinuance of VA benefits to students or trainees.

**d**. If there are serious discrepancies, address correspondence to the chief administrative officer of the ETI. This is usually the same person with authority to sign VA Form 22-8974, Designation of Certifying Official(s), and VA Form 22-1919, Conflicting Interests Certification for Proprietary Schools Only. When there are no serious discrepancies, correspondence may, based on individual circumstances, be addressed to another person, e.g., the certifying official, in order to elicit an appropriate response.

[**Go to Top**](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073927/M22-4,%20Part%2010,%20Compliance%20Survey.%20Chapter%2007%20-%20Reports%20and%20Correspondence.#top)

 

---