# Provisions of Chapter 1607 (Reserve Educational Asistance Programs (REAP))

**DRAFT: 2/17/06. IMPLEMENT AS ADVISED.**

**Part XI: Chapter 1 - Provisions of Chapter 1607 (Reserve Educational Assistance Program (REAP))**

[1.01 Background](#101)  
[1.02 Responsibilities of DoD, DHS, and VA](#102)  
[1.03 Eligibility](#103)  
[1.04 Entitlement](#104)

[1.05 Period of Eligibility](#105)  
[1.06 Monthly Rates](#106)  
[1.07 Programs of Education and Other Benefit Features](#107)   
[1.08 Other Chapter 1607 Related Procedures](#108)

 

[**Appendix A** - Current Chapter 1607 Rates](#A)   
[A.01 Table A.01. Chapter 1607 Current Rate Table (Cost of Living Adjustment 10/1/2005)](#tA01)  
[A.02 Table A.02. Chapter 1607 Historic Rate Table (Effective 10-01-2004)](#tA02)  
[A.03 Table A.03. Chapter 1607 Historic Rate Table (Effective 10-01-2003)](#tA03)  
[A.04 Table A.04. Chapter 1607 Historic Rate Table (Effective 10-01-2002)](#tA04)  
[A.05 Table A.05. Chapter 1607 Historic Rate Table (Effective 01-01-2002)](#tA05)  
[A.06 Table A.06. Chapter 1607 Historic Rate Table (Effective 10-01-2001)](#tA06)  
[A.07 Table A.07. Chapter 1607 Historic Rate Table (Effective 11-01-2000)](#tA07)

[**Appendix B** - Chapter 1606 Kicker Rate Table](#B)   
[B.01 Table B.01. Chapter 1606 Kicker Rate Table](#tB01)

**1.01 Background**

---

**a. Purpose**. This chapter describes the provisions of Chapter 1607, title 10 U.S. Code. This benefit is also known as REAP (Reserve Educational Assistance Program). REAP is part of [Public Law 108-375 (section 527)](https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-108publ375/html/PLAW-108publ375.htm), enacted on October 28, 2004. VA's (Veterans Affairs) implementing instructions for Chapter 1607 are contained in this chapter and chapters 2 through 10 of M22-4, part XI.

**b. Overview**. Chapter 1607 creates a new Department of Defense (DoD) and Department of Homeland Security (DHS) funded education program that provides benefits to certain National Guard and reserve members who are called or ordered to active service in response to a war or national emergency declared by the President or the Congress. These instructions reflect VA's understanding of Chapter 1607 and are based partly on DoD/DHS guidance and a memorandum of understanding between DoD, DHS and the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). DoD and DHS will determine policy and who is eligible for Chapter 1607. VA will administer the program and pay benefits. DoD and DHS will reimburse VA for Chapter 1607 payments. The VA/DoD/DHS relationship is similar to the relationship established for Chapter 1606 of title 10, U.S. Code.

**c. Educational Assistance Program Under Chapter 1607.** The Secretaries of each military department, under guidance prescribed by the Secretary of Defense, and the Secretary of Homeland Security (for the U.S. Coast Guard), will establish the program required by Chapter 1607 [(](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:16162 edition:prelim))[10 U.S.C. 16162](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:16162 edition:prelim))[).](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:16162 edition:prelim))

**1.02 Responsibilities of DoD, DHS, and VA**

---

**a. DoD and DHS Responsibilities.** DoD and DHS have the responsibility to:

(1) Establish program policy regarding eligibility and evidence requirements for Chapter 1607 benefits.

(2) Provide a written notice of eligibility to each reservist when he or she meets eligibility requirements for educational assistance under Chapter 1607. Such notice will be prior to release from active service. The notice summarizes the provisions of Chapter 1607 and includes prominent reference to the provisions regarding termination of assistance. (See par. 2.05d regarding use of this document for establishing eligibility.)

(3) Provide eligibility information to VA, to include when and why the reservist becomes ineligible for Chapter 1607 benefits.

(4) Reimburse VA for educational assistance payments under this program.

**b. VA Responsibilities.** VA has the responsibility to:

(1) Authorize and pay educational assistance allowance.

(2) Prepare and publish applications, regulations, pamphlets and other forms for administering the program.

(3) Develop and implement claims processing procedures.

(4) Develop and install systems for paying educational assistance allowance.

**1.03 Eligibility**

---

*Caution: DoD and DHS make the eligibility determinations for Chapter 1607. The following is given as background information only. VA claims examiners will not make eligibility determinations.*

**a. Basic Eligibility.** On or after September 11, 2001, a servicemember of the ready reserve is eligible to Chapter 1607 benefits if the servicemember--

(1) Served on active duty in support of a contingency operation for 90 consecutive days or more; or

(2) Performed full-time National Guard duty under [section 502(f) of title 32](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:32 section:502 edition:prelim)) for 90 consecutive days or more when authorized by the President or Secretary of Defense for the purpose of responding to a national emergency declared by the President and supported by Federal funds.

*NOTE 1: The "reserve components" consist of the Army Reserve, Naval Reserve, Air Force Reserve, Marine Corps Reserve, Coast Guard Reserve, the Army National Guard and the Air National Guard. See part VIII, paragraph 1.02A for more detailed information on the organization of the reserve components.*

**NOTE 2: Individuals are eligible as soon as they have served 90 consecutive days on active duty in a qualifying period of active duty. Not all call-up service is necessarily qualifying. DoD/DHS will identify which reservists and full-time National Guard members are eligible.* *In some cases, individuals in an AGR (Active Guard and Reserve) may be qualified.**

***NOTE 3: Call-up after September 10, 2001 is not a requirement. The key issue is: Did the individual serve in an authorized contingency operation or serve in qualifying full-time National Guard duty for at least 90 consecutive days on or after September 11, 2001?***

****NOTE 4: “Active Service” for title 10 purposes is service on active duty or full-time National Guard duty.****

*****NOTE 5: The Regional Processing Offices (RPOs) will forward any questions concerning basic eligibility requirements to the appropriate military service or Coast Guard contact point. While VA can question DoD's decision as to eligibility, VA does not have any authority in this area. RPOs should only question cases that have conflicting evidence (the evidence that VA has conflicts with the eligibility status as furnished by Defense Manpower Data Center (DMDC)).  See paragraph 2.05d(1) for more information regarding contact points.*****

**b. Disabled Members.** Servicemembers who are released from active service before completing 90 consecutive days are also eligible if they are released because of an injury, illness or disease incurred or aggravated in the line of duty. The military services make the decision on who is released for disability, not VA.

**c. Written Notification.** As noted in [paragraph 1.02a(2)](#102a2) above, the law requires DoD/DHS to provide servicemembers a written notice summarizing the provisions of Chapter 1607 prior to release from active duty (10 [U.S.C. 16163(c](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:16163 edition:prelim)))). DoD will provide VA with details as to the type of written notice they will provide. As of this writing, DoD was not implementing this provision.

**d. Termination of Assistance Under Chapter 1607.** Servicemembers receiving assistance under Chapter 1607 will have benefits terminated if: (1) they receive financial assistance under[section 2107](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:2107 edition:prelim)) (Senior ROTC scholarship) of title 10, U.S.C., or (2) they separate from the Selected Reserve if they were called up from the Selected Reserve or the Individual Ready Reserve (IRR) if they were called up from the IRR ([10 U.S.C. 16165](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:16165 edition:prelim))). These events do not result in permanent termination of eligibility. (See RPO Letter 22-08-04, par. 6.)

*Note: Reservists are not prohibited from receiving Chapter 1607 benefits if they receive financial assistance under [section 2107a of title 10, U.S.C.](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:2107 edition:prelim)) This financial assistance is available to specially selected servicemembers of the Army Reserve and Army National Guard.*

**e. Bar to Duplication of Educational Assistance Allowance.** The reservist may not receive benefits concurrently with these benefits: Chapter 1606 of title 10 U.S.C., or Chapters 30, 31, 32, or 35 of title 38 U.S.C., or the Hostage Relief Act of 1980. If a reservist is eligible under Chapter 1607 and one of these programs, the reservist must elect in writing which benefit he or she wishes to receive. Paragraph 2.04b describes the manner in which this election is made.

*NOTE: As currently written, Chapter 1607 does not bar duplication of benefits with the following education benefits: section 901 and 903 of PL 96-342, the education options of NCS (National Call to Service) which are provided by Chapter 31 of title 10, and the Antiterrorism Act.*

**f. Bar to Dual Eligibility (Chapters 30, 1607 and 1606).** A servicemember may not use the same period of service to qualify for benefits under Chapter 1607 and Chapter 30 of title 38, U.S.C. ([10 U.S.C. 16163(d)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:16163 edition:prelim))). The servicemember must make an irrevocable decision as to which program the service will be credited toward. The military services will obtain these elections. See paragraph 2.07 for more detailed procedures. The same period of service may be used to establish eligibility to Chapter 1606 and to Chapter 1607 of title 10. The following are some examples of potential dual eligibility situations:

**Example 1:** An individual signs up for 6 years in a Selected Reserve component and becomes eligible for Chapter 1606. After 3 years, he is called to active duty involuntarily under title 10 (orders are from September 1, 2002 to September 1, 2004). This person remains eligible for Chapter 1606 while on active duty. He may continue to receive Chapter 1606 benefits. He also may establish eligibility to Chapter 1607 and elect to receive Chapter 1607 benefits, which are generally higher than Chapter 1606 benefits.

If he serves a full two years on active duty (or has orders for 24 months but serves less and is separated for a qualifying separation reason under Chapter 30), this person may establish eligibility to Chapter 30 as well. If this individual wishes to use the two years of active duty toward Chapter 30, an election is required as noted above. If this individual elects to have two years of his Selected Reserve service count toward Chapter 30, he or she is not eligible for Chapter 1607; also, if the individual made such an election, any Chapter 1606 benefits for enrollment during the 2-year call-up period will become an overpayment.

*Note: If the individual elects Chapter 30, see part VIII, paragraph 1.03d, example 1 for details on the effect on Chapter 1606 eligibility.*

**Example 2:** An individual has established eligibility for Chapter 1606 and has served for 8 years in the Selected Reserve, two years beyond his original 6-year commitment. He is then called to active duty, serves a full two years and becomes eligible for Chapter 30 under category IA. He also qualifies for Chapter 1607, having been called up to active duty from the Selected Reserve under an authorized contingency. The servicemember also retains Chapter 1606 eligibility since he completed his initial six-year commitment.

This individual can use the 2 years for Chapter 30 without compromising his 1606 eligibility. An election as to how the 2 years of active service is to be credited (Chapter 30 or 1607) is required. The individual may use Chapter 1606 during the 2-year call-up. If the individual elects Chapter 1607, he may receive Chapter 1607 benefits instead of Chapter 1606 benefits for the same period (except for the first 90 days of active duty). If the individual elects chapter 30, any Chapter 1606 or Chapter 1607 benefits received during the 2-year call-up period becomes an overpayment.

**Example 3:** An individual who is eligible for Chapter 1606 is called to active duty and serves 16 months. He returns to a drilling status in the Selected Reserve after the active duty.

This person becomes eligible for Chapter 1607 because of the call-up but doesn't establish Chapter 30 eligibility because he served less than 24 months on active duty.

**Example 4:** An individual signs up for a two-year obligation on active duty and serves the 2 years, thereby becoming eligible for Chapter 30 under category IA (less than 3 years obligation). She then agrees to serve 6 years in the Selected Reserve, thereby becoming eligible for Chapter 1606. This person is entitled to Chapter 30 at the category IA rate as well as Chapter 1606. (Total entitlement used is limited by the 48-month rule.)  Part V, paragraph 3.09d(1) provides that VA will presume the individual wishes to elect to have 4 years of her Selected Reserve service count toward Chapter 30 eligibility (the 2 X 4 program--category IC) and not have this service count towards Chapter 1606 eligibility.

If during the 4-year period while in the Selected Reserve she were called up for 2 years, she could also be eligible for Chapter 1607 benefits. If she were to choose the Chapter 30, category 1A for 36 months and Chapter 1607 for 12 months, the total benefits would be $40,166.40 ($840 X 36 =$30,240 plus $827.20 X 12 =$9,926.40). If the person were to choose the Chapter 30 2X4 program and not receive Chapter 1607, total benefits would be $37,224 over 36 months. Another factor to consider: the Chapter 30 delimiting date for the second choice would be 4 years longer than for the first choice. The decision as to which benefit to chose must be made by the individual.

**Example 5:** An individual serves two years of a 3-year active duty obligation and is discharged from the Army without a qualifying Chapter 30 separation reason. He then signs up for 6 years in the Selected Reserve, becoming eligible for Chapter 1606. He is not eligible for Chapter 30 at all unless he makes the election to use 4 years of the Selected Reserve service toward Chapter 30.

In this case if he does make the 2X4 election, he loses his Chapter 1606 eligibility. Such an election of Chapter 30 would, of course, be beneficial to the individual. If while in the Selected Reserve (and within the 4-year Selected Reserve period), he were called up for 90 days or more, he could also be eligible for Chapter 1607 benefits, but he would lose the 2X4 benefit if he applies the active service toward Chapter 1607. In this situation, it would be better to stay with Chapter 30. Of course, if the person was called up after the 4-year period required to establish the 2X4 eligibility, then the person could retain the 2X4 eligibility and still qualify for Chapter 1607.

**g. Suspension or Termination of Eligibility.** Reserved for future use.

**h.** **Effective Date Issues.** See [paragraph 1.06e](#106e) for effective date issues.

**1.04 Entitlement**

---

**a. Duration of Entitlement to Chapter 1607**. All persons eligible for Chapter 1607 receive 36 months entitlement regardless of how long they serve in a qualifying period of active duty in a reserve component ([10 U.S.C. 16162(d)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:16162 edition:prelim))). Servicemembers discharged for disability earn the 36 months of entitlement even if they serve less than 90 days. The 48-month maximum entitlement rule applies when an individual uses chapter 1607 and other VA education programs. These other programs are Chapters 30, 31, 32, 35 of title 38, Chapter 1606 of title 10, section 901 and 903 of PL 96-342, and the Anti-Terrorism Act. The 48-month restriction does not apply to Chapter 1607 and the education options of the National Call to Service benefit. Restoration of entitlement provisions apply to members under Chapter 1607 as described in [subparagraph c](#104c) below.

**b. Entitlement Charge**

(1) Institutional Training. VA will charge a full day of entitlement for each day paid at the full-time rate. VA reduces the entitlement charge proportionately if the individual is enrolled at less than full time. An individual enrolled at less than 1/2 time will be charged entitlement at 1/4 of the full-time rate.

(2) Apprenticeship and On-the-job Training. VA will charge entitlement as follows:

(i) During the first 6 months of training, VA charges entitlement at 75% of a month for a full month of training. This percentage is increased to 85 percent from October 1, 2005 until January 1, 2008 (Public Law 108-454, section 103).

(ii) During the second 6 months of training, VA charges entitlement at 55% of a month for a full month of training. This percentage is increased to 65 percent from October 1, 2005 until January 1, 2008.

(iii) During the remainder of training, VA charges entitlement at 35% of a month for a full month of training. This percentage is increased to 45 percent from October 1, 2005 until January 1, 2008.

(iv) During any month of training, the servicemember pursuing apprenticeship or on-job training must complete 120 hours of training to receive the full monthly benefit. VA will reduce the educational assistance allowance proportionately and the entitlement charge proportionately for the hours worked less than the required 120 hours.

(3) Correspondence Training. VA will charge 1 month of entitlement for an amount equal to the rate for full-time institutional training in effect when the training occurred. This rate includes the additional allowance for chapter 1606 kickers.

(4) Flight Training. VA will charge 1 month of entitlement for an amount equal to the rate for full-time institutional training in effect when the training occurred. This rate includes the additional allowance for chapter 1606 kickers.

**c. Entitlement Restoration**.  Servicemembers eligible for Chapter 1607 are entitled to the restoration of entitlement provision if they are called up to active duty under [title 10 U.S.C., sections 12301(a), 12301(d), 12301(g)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:12301 edition:prelim)), [12302](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:12302 edition:prelim)), [12304](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:12304 edition:prelim)). If a serviceperson eligible for Chapter 1607 is unable to complete a period of training due to call-up and the school fails to give a grade, then the servicemember would have entitlement restored for the period of training preceding the call-up. See part IV, paragraph 11.20 for more information regarding entitlement restoration. Full-time National Guard members called to active service under title 32 U.S.C. will not receive restoration of entitlement.

**Example:** A servicemember is called-up in an authorized contingency and becomes eligible for Chapter 1607. He must drop out of school after one month of training at full time. This person is not eligible for entitlement restoration because he was not eligible for Chapter 1607 at the time he was forced to drop out. (He may have been eligible for entitlement restoration under Chapter 1606.) He is released from the first call-up and is now attending classes while in a drilling status. He is once again called to active service under title 10 orders and has to drop out of classes without credit after one month. He would now become eligible for entitlement restoration because of the second call up. In this case, he would receive restoration of one month of entitlement.

**d. Extensions.** Chapter 1607 claimants do not receive entitlement extensions for any reason.

**1.05 Period of Eligibility**

---

See RPO letter 22-08-04, paragraph 5 , regarding delimiting dates for individuals separated from the Selected Reserve.

**a. Period of Eligibility-General.** There is no specific delimiting date for an eligible reservist under Chapter 1607 in most cases. A servicemember remains eligible to educational assistance under Chapter 1607 while continuing to serve (1) in the Selected Reserve, in the case of a servicemember called or ordered to active service while serving in the Selected Reserve; or (2) in the IRR, in the case of a servicemember called or ordered to active service from the IRR ([10 U.S.C. 16164](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:16164 edition:prelim))). Eligibility ends on the date of separation from the Selected Reserve (if called up from the Selected Reserve) or the date of separation from the Ready Reserve (if called up from the Ready Service). The period of eligibility differs for persons separated for disability as explained in [subparagraph b.](#105b) 

**b. Period of Eligibility-Disability Cases.** A servicemember who is separated from the Ready Reserve because of a disability which was not the result of the individual’s own willful misconduct has a period of eligibility of 10 years beginning on the date the servicemember became eligible for Chapter 1607. If the person is separated for disability before serving 90 days, the date of eligibility is the date on which the person was separated. (Note: A person must be discharged for disability to receive this 10-year period. The mere existence of a disability does not qualify an individual for the 10-year period.) The 10-year period of eligibility for disability cases can be extended under two provisions ([10 U.S.C. 16164(b)(2)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:16164 edition:prelim))) listed in [subparagraphs (1)](#105b1) and [(2)](#105b2) below.

**Example 1:**  A person was called-up on September 11, 2001 and became eligible for Chapter 1607 on December 9, 2001 after serving at least 90 consecutive days; he is then discharged on January 11, 2002 due to a disability incurred in the line of duty. This person's 10-year eligibility period begins on December 9, 2001, which is the first day of eligibility. This person has 10 years (until December 9, 2011) to use Chapter 1607 benefits subject to the two possible extensions listed below.

**Example 2**: A person became eligible on December 9, 2001 after serving at least 90 consecutive days and then is released from active duty. The person returns to the reserve component and serves 5 more years, is disabled not due to willful misconduct, and is separated from the Selected Reserve because of the disability on January 11, 2006. The person's 10-year eligibility period begins from his or her eligibility date (December 9, 2001). Note that this person has less than 6 years after his or her release for disability to use chapter 1607.

(1) Disability Extension Until End of Enrollment Period.

(i) If the reservist is enrolled in an educational institution not regularly operated on a quarter or semester basis and the delimiting date occurs after a major portion of the course is completed, eligibility will be extended to the end of the course or for 12 weeks, whichever is less.

(ii) If the reservist is enrolled in an institution regularly operated on a quarter or semester basis and the delimiting date occurs during a quarter or semester, the period of eligibility will be extended to the end of that quarter or semester.

(2) Disability Extension for Disability Cases. If the reservist was prevented because of disability from pursuing training during the 10-year period of eligibility, eligibility may be extended for the period of the disability. See part III, paragraph 4.03 for more details on how to implement this disability extension provision which is identical to the provision in other education programs.

*Note 1: The servicemember may leave the Selected Reserve or IRR and return to become eligible from a new period of active service. In this case, the person begins a new period of eligibility.*

*Note 2: The period of eligibility ends when the servicemember begins receiving financial assistance under [section 2107 of title 10, U.S.C.](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:2107 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title10-section2107)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true), as a servicemember of the Senior Reserve Officers' Training Corps (ROTC). During this time period, the servicemember is considered to be in a period of ineligibility. The servicemember could become eligible again after ceasing to receive the financial assistance from ROTC.*

**1.06 Monthly Rates**

---

**a. Benefits Under Chapter 1607**. The educational assistance allowance payable under Chapter 1607 is a percentage of the Chapter 30 three-year rate (category 1B rate) based on the number of continuous days served on active duty. The full-time rate in the table below is the rate for full-time institutional training under Chapter 1607. ([10 U.S.C. 16162(c)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:16162 edition:prelim))[)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:16162 edition:prelim))

**Chapter 1607 Rates:**

| Servicemember Serves | Percentage of 3-Year Rate | Full-Time Rate FY 2006 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 90 days but less than one year\* | 40% | $413.60 |
| One year but less than two years | 60% | $620.40 |
| Two continuous years or more | 80% | $827.20 |

\*Persons separated from the Selected Reserve for disability with less than 90 days service receive the 40% rate. Persons separated from the Selected Reserve after 90 days of active duty would get the applicable rate from this table.

**b. Benefit Rates**. See RPO Letter 22-08-04, paragraph 2, regarding combining periods of service. Rate tables for current and historic Chapter 1607 rates are shown in [Appendix A.](#A) To determine which rate level applies, VA counts 90 calendar days (do not just add 3 months; count the days) from the beginning of a qualifying period of service and begins paying the 40% rate on the 90th day. VA pays the 60% rate one year later on the day before the one-year anniversary, and VA pays the 80% rate on the day before the 2-year anniversary. Periods of service may not be combined to increase the rate. If there are multiple periods of service, VA will pay the higher rate from the date the individual is eligible for the higher rate. VA will not retroactively pay a higher rate.

**Example 1:** A servicemember is called up on 01/10/05. The 40% rate would start on 04/09/05 (which is the 90th consecutive day after 01/10/05, including 1/10/05), 60% would start on 01/9/06, and 80% would start on 01/9/07.

**Example 2:** A servicemember is called up on 02/01/05. The servicemember serves until 03/15/05 and is discharged from the Selected Reserve for disability. He is eligible to receive the 40 percent rate due to discharge for disability effective from 3/15/05 even though he did not serve 90 consecutive days.

**Example 3:** A servicemember is called up for 7 months and returns to drilling status. He is then called again for 13 months. This individual is eligible for the 40% rate based on the first period. He continues to be eligible for the 40% rate until 12 months have passed within the second period. At that point, he is entitled to the 60% rate. He would not receive the 60% rate before the end of the 12-month period.

**c. Reduced Rates**. Reduced rates will apply for apprenticeship/OJT, correspondence, and flight training as well as to members still on active duty while using Chapter 1607.

(1) Apprenticeship/OJT.  Servicemembers using Chapter 1607 for apprenticeship/OJT receive a percentage (40, 60, 80%) of the Chapter 30 benefit. For example, a Chapter 30 category IB student in Step 1 of an OJT program is entitled to a rate equal to 75% (became 85% effective 10-01-05) of the Chapter 30 institutional rate (equal to $878 as of 10/1/05). A Chapter 1607 recipient, having served on active duty under a call-up for 90 consecutive days, would be entitled to 40% of the Chapter 30 rate, or $351.56. The rates for apprenticeship and OJT training in [Appendix A](#A) are determined based on this principle.

*Note: A person eligible for the 40% rate who is in apprenticeship or OJT step 3 would receive 40% of the Chapter 30 rate or $186.12 effective 10/01/05. This is still more than the Chapter 1606 step 3 which is $133.65 effective 10/01/05.*

(2) Correspondence and Flight. Servicemembers using Chapter 1607 for correspondence or flight training also receive a percentage of the Chapter 30 benefit percentage. For example, a flight training student eligible for the Chapter 1607 40 percent rate has tuition and fees for flight training of $2,000 during the 3-month course. The claimant under Chapter 30 (a category 1B student) would receive 60 percent of the cost, or $1,200. The Chapter 1607 claimant would receive 40 percent of the Chapter 30 amount, or ($1,200 X 40%) $480. (A person receiving the 60% rate would receive $720 and a person receiving the 80% rate would receive $960.) Under correspondence training, the principle is the same. The Chapter 30 payment is 55 percent of the cost. The Chapter 1607 payment would be the Chapter 1607 percentage (40, 60 or 80 percent) of the amount a Chapter 30 (category 1B) claimant would receive. Therefore, a person receiving 40 percent gets 40% of 55%, or 22% of the cost; a person receiving 60% receives 33% and a person receiving 80% receives 44% of the cost.

(3) Servicepersons. Persons using Chapter 1607 while still on active duty will receive a monthly rate which reimburses tuition and fees up to the applicable rate for institutional training as shown in the appropriate rate table in [Appendix A](#A) (include the Chapter 1606 kicker). The calculations are done in the same manner as for Chapter 30. For example, a student still on active duty and eligible for the 40 percent rate, has tuition and fees of $1,200 during a 3-month term at full-time which begins after 10/1/05. This student would receive a monthly rate of $400 (which over 3 months reimburses the tuition and fees of $1,200) instead of the full-time monthly rate of $413.60 which is the monthly rate for persons receiving the 40% benefit level in fiscal year 2006 for institutional training

*Note: A Chapter 1606 kicker, if payable, is added on to the rate computed in subparagraph (3).*

(4) Veterans at Less than 1/2 Time. Veterans at less than 1/2 time will have their monthly rate computed based on tuition and fees the same as servicepersons as described in subparagraph (3) above.

*Note: A Chapter 1606 kicker, if payable, is added on to the rate computed in subparagraph (4).*

**d. Chapter 1606 Kickers.**   (See Policy Advisory dated July 25, 2007) The Chapter 1606 kicker will be paid to a servicemember who is eligible for Chapter 1607. The possible monthly kicker levels are $100, $200, and $350. The servicemember must be currently eligible for the Chapter 1606 kicker in order to receive the kicker under Chapter 1607. The kicker will be paid proportionate to the training time. If the training time is less than 1/2 time more than 1/4 time, then 1/2 of the Chapter 1606 kicker should be paid. If the training time is 1/4 or less, 1/4 of the Chapter 1606 kicker should be paid. In Chapter 1607, the kicker is always added to the rate that would otherwise be payable under Chapter 1607. The kicker will not be subject to any adjustment because of the rate level (40, 60, 80%) the person is receiving. Kickers are payable at the service department's discretion. See part VIII, paragraph 1.10b for more information on the Chapter 1606 kicker.

**Example:** A servicemember is eligible for Chapter 1606 and the high ($350) 1606 kicker. He claims Chapter 1607 (at the 40% rate) for full time attendance in fiscal year 2006; if eligible for Chapter 1607, VA will pay the Chapter 1607 rate and the Chapter 1606 kicker. In this case, he receives $413.60 and the $350 kicker for a total of $763.60.

*Note: There are three exceptions to the requirement that a person maintain Chapter 1606 eligibility in order to receive the Chapter 1606 kicker in Chapter 1607. See RPO Letter 22-04-25 for more details.*

> **e. Effective Date of Benefits.** Chapter 1607 benefits may be paid before the date of enactment of the law, October 28, 2004. Chapter 1607 benefits are potentially payable on the 90th day after September 11, 2001 (90 days must have been completed; this includes September 11, 2001), which is December 9, 2001. Persons who were serving in a contingency operation on September 11, 2001, and who were in school on December 9, 2001 could receive Chapter 1607 starting on December 9, 2001. Disability is an exception; benefits could be paid as of 9/11/01 if a person were discharged for disability on that day. For persons who received Chapter 1606 on or after 9/11/01, VA will pay Chapter 1607 from the earliest possible date. The Chapter 1606 benefits previously paid will be deducted from Chapter 1607 benefits due. (Please see Policy Advisory, Chapter 1607, Effective Date, dated 3/9/06.)

**1.07 Programs of Education and Other Benefit Features**

---

**a. Programs of Education and Types of Programs**. Chapter 1607 benefits may be provided for any program of education that is an approved program under chapter 30. (See pt. III, par. 6.02 for the definition of "program of education.") Chapter 1607 is payable for flight training, correspondence, apprenticeship/OJT and any other type of program listed in the table in part III, paragraph 7.03 as payable under Chapter 30 except as shown in subparagraph b below. Benefits for licensing and certification tests are available under Chapter 1607 effective January 6, 2006.

**b. Chapter 30 Features Not Available**. See RPO Letter 22-08-04, paragraphs 1 and 3, regarding accelerated payment and buy-up. The following Chapter 30 features are not available for chapter 1607: accelerated payment, tuition assistance top-up, death benefit, transferability of entitlement to dependents, licensing and certification tests before January 6, 2006, and national tests for admission or credit taken.  
  
*Note: Lump sum payment rules are the same as for chapter 30. An individual on active duty or training at less than 1/2 time may receive a lump-sum payment for all benefits due for an entire term, quarter, or semester. See paragraph 2.10d for more information. For advance payment, see [paragraph 1.08c(9).](#108c9)*

**c.** **Tuition Assistance**. Reservists in a drilling status are eligible for Chapter 1607 and the military's tuition assistance benefit for the same courses. A reservist serving on active duty is not eligible for tuition assistance and chapter 1607 for the same courses. See part IV, 3.07a for more information.

**d. Tutorial Assistance**. Reservists eligible to receive Chapter 1607 benefits are not eligible to receive tutorial assistance.

**e. Work Study**. Reservists eligible for Chapter 1607 and training at the 3/4 time or more rate are eligible for the work-study allowance. They can perform five of the six activities approved for work-study (see VBA Education Letter 22-05-02 for more information on authorized duties). They cannot work at DoD facilities supporting the administration of the Chapter 1606 program because the person has to be in receipt of Chapter 1606 benefits to perform this work study activity. ([38 U.S.C., section 3485)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3485 edition:prelim))

**1.08 Other Chapter 1607 Related Procedures**

---

**a. Chapter 1607 has many features in common with other benefit programs described in this manual**. The following is a list of M22-4 chapters which contain instructions that apply to Chapter 1607 unless otherwise stated.

**b. Part III Chapters**

(1) Administrative Issues– Chapter 1

(2) Administrative Procedures – Chapter 2.

*Note: Both Chapters 1607 and 1606 have unique appeal provisions. See paragraph 2.04 of this part for more details.*

(3) Processing Applications for Benefits – See paragraph 2.04 of this part for special procedures.

(4) Counseling – Chapter 5.

(5) Programs of Education – Chapter 6.

(6) Restrictions on Training – Chapter 7. Most of this chapter applies to Chapter 1607. Also, see [paragraph 1.07](#107) above.

(7) Periodic Education Certifications – Chapter 8. VA will not impose monthly certifications of attendance until regulations authorizing this have been approved.

(8) Certificates of Eligibility and Disallowances – Chapter 9.

**c. Part IV Chapters**  

(1) Enrollment Certifications – Chapter 1. VA will not follow the usual one-year from date of claim rule described in paragraph 1.12b(1) of part IV, chapter 1. See [paragraph 1.06e.](#106e)

(2) Flight and Correspondence Training – Chapter 2.

(3) Duplication of Benefits – Chapter 3. See paragraph 3.01.

(4) Change of Program – Chapter 4.

(5) Unsatisfactory Progress or Conduct – Chapter 5.

(6) Measurement (Standard College Degree) – Chapter 6.

(7) Other Measurement Issues – Chapter 7.

(8) Interval Payment – Chapter 8.

(9) Advance and Special Payments – Chapter 10. Individuals under Chapter 1607 are entitled to advance payment. (Initially, there will be no advance payment because of system limitations.)

(10) Enrollment Adjustments – Chapter 11. Follow the reduction rule for students who do not have monthly certifications of attendance (pt IV, par. 11.10c(7)).

(11) Out-of-System Processing -- See part XI, Chapter 9 of this part for out-of-system processing for chapter 1607.

(12) Miscellaneous Award Issues – Chapter 13.

(13) Tables –  Chapter 14.

APPENDIX A

---

[(8-1-08 rates)](http://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill/resources/benefits_resources/rates/ch1607/ch1607rates080108.asp)  
[(10-1-07 rates)](http://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill/resources/benefits_resources/rates/ch1607/ch1607rates100107.asp)   
[(10-1-06 rates)](http://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill/resources/benefits_resources/rates/ch1607/ch1607rates100106.asp)

**Table A.01. Chapter 1607 Current Rate Table (Cost of Living Adjustment 10-01-2019)**

A statutory increase in educational assistance allowance for trainees under the Reserve Educational Assistance Program (Ch. 1607 of title 10 U.S.C.) has been approved.  The following basic monthly rates are effective October 1, 2019.

| **SERVICE CRITERIA** | | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **TYPE OF TRAINING** | **Service of**  **90 days**  **But less than one year** | **Service of 1 year**  **But less than**  **2 years** | **Service of 2 years or more** |
| **INSTITUTIONAL** | **Monthly Rate in Dollars** | | |
| FULL TIME | $820.00 | $1230.00 | $1640.00 |
| THREE-QUARTER TIME | $615.00 | $922.50 | $1230.00 |
| ONE-HALF TIME | $410.00 | $615.00 | $820.00 |
| LESS THAN HALF-TIME | Tuition and Fees, not to exceed  $410.00 | Tuition and Fees, not to exceed   $615.00 | Tuition and Fees,  not to exceed $820.00 |
| QUARTER TIME OR LESS | Tuition and Fees, not to exceed  $205.00 | Tuition and Fees, not to exceed   $307.50 | Tuition and   Fees,  not to exceed   $410.00 |
| **COOPERATIVE** | $820.00 | $1230.00 | $1640.00 |
| **APPRENTICESHIP**  **ON-THE-JOB TRAINING** | Rates are proportionally reduced if less than 120 hours is worked. | | |
| FIRST 6 MONTHS | $615.00 | $922.50 | $1230.00 |
| SECOND 6 MONTHS | $451.00 | $676.50 | $902.00 |
| REMAINDER OF PROGRAM | $287.00 | $430.50 | $574.00 |
| Individuals pursuing a program of education consisting exclusively of correspondence or flight training will be reimbursed a percentage of the approved charges. | | | |
| **CORRESPONDENCE** | 22% | 33% | 44% |
| **FLIGHT** | 24% | 36% | 48% |

NOTE:  The monthly rates listed above do not include "kicker" amounts.  "Kickers" are additional monthly amounts contributed by the Department of Defense (DoD) on behalf of individuals to encourage enlistment or retention in the Armed Forces.  If your payment includes a kicker, the kicker will be paid in addition to the increased rates as listed above.  VA only pays "kickers" to individuals authorized by DoD.

**Table A.01. Chapter 1607 Historic Rate Table (Cost of Living Adjustment 10-01-2005)**

| **TYPE OF TRAINING** | **10-1-2005** | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **INSTITUTIONAL** | **Service of 90 days but less than one year** | **Service of 1 year +** | **Service of 2 years +** |
| **Monthly Rates in Dollars** | | | |
| FULL | $413.60 | $620.40 | $827.20 |
| THREE-QUARTER | $310.20 | $465.30 | $620.40 |
| ONE-HALF | $206.80 | $310.20 | $413.60 |
| LESS THAN HALF-TIME | Tuition and Fees up to $206.80 | Tuition and Fees up to $310.20 | Tuition and Fees up to $413.60 |
| QUARTER OR LESS | Tuition and Fees up to $103.40 | Tuition and Fees up to $155.10 | Tuition and Fees up to $206.80 |
| **COOPERATIVE** | $413.60 | $620.40 | $827.20 |
| **APPRENTICESHIP /  ON-THE-JOB** **Training** | Rates are proportionally reduced if less than 120 hours is worked.  \*Public Law 108-454 increased the percentage (to 85%, 65%, 45%) until 01-01-08 | | |
| First 6 Months | \*$351.56 | \*$527.34 | \*$703.12 |
| Second 6 Months | \*$268.84 | \*$403.26 | \*$537.68 |
| Remainder of Program | \*$186.12 | \*$279.18 | \*$372.24 |
| **CORRESPONDENCE TRAINING:** Correspondence training is reimbursed at: 40% level gets 22%, 60% level gets 33%, and 80% level gets 44% of approved cost of the course. Entitlement is charged based on the rate of one month for a benefit amount equal to the full-time institutional rate. | | | |
| **FLIGHT TRAINING:** Flight training is reimbursed at: 40% level gets 24%, 60% level get 36%, and 80% level gets 48% of the approved cost of the course.  Entitlement is charged based on the rate of one month for a benefit amount equal to the full-time institutional rate. | | | |

**Table A.02. Chapter 1607 Historic Rate Table (Cost of Living Adjustment 10-01-2004)**

| **TYPE OF TRAINING** | **10-1-2004** | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **INSTITUTIONAL** | **Service of 90 days but less than one year** | **Service of 1 year +** | **Service of 2 years +** |
| **Monthly Rates in Dollars** | | | |
| FULL | $401.60 | $602.40 | $803.20 |
| THREE-QUARTER | $301.20 | $451.80 | $602.40 |
| ONE-HALF | $200.80 | $301.20 | $401.60 |
| LESS THAN HALF-TIME | Tuition and Fees up to $200.80 | Tuition and Fees up to $301.20 | Tuition and Fees up to $401.60 |
| QUARTER OR LESS | Tuition and Fees up to $100.40 | Tuition and Fees up to $150.60 | Tuition and Fees up to $200.80 |
| **COOPERATIVE** | $401.60 | $602.40 | $803.20 |
| **APPRENTICESHIP /  ON-THE-JOB** **Training** | Rates are proportionally reduced if less than 120 hours is worked.  \*Public Law 108-454 increased the percentage (to 85%, 65%, 45%) until 01-01-08 | | |
| First 6 Months | $301.20 | $451.80 | $602.40 |
| Second 6 Months | $220.88 | $331.32 | $441.76 |
| Remainder of Program | $140.56 | $210.84 | $281.12 |
| **CORRESPONDENCE TRAINING:** Correspondence training is reimbursed at: 40% level gets 22%, 60% level gets 33%, and 80% level gets 44% of approved cost of the course. Entitlement is charged based on the rate of one month for a benefit amount equal to the full-time institutional rate. | | | |
| **FLIGHT TRAINING:** Flight training is reimbursed at: 40% level gets 24%, 60% level get 36%, and 80% level gets 48% of the approved cost of the course.  Entitlement is charged based on the rate of one month for a benefit amount equal to the full-time institutional rate. | | | |

**Table A.03. Chapter 1607 Historic Rate Table (Cost of Living Adjustment 10-01-2003)**

| **TYPE OF TRAINING** | **10-1-2003** | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **INSTITUTIONAL** | **Service of 90 days but less than one year** | **Service of 1 year +** | **Service of 2 years +** |
| **Monthly Rates in Dollars** | | | |
| FULL | $394.00 | $591.00 | $788.00 |
| THREE-QUARTER | $295.50 | $443.25 | $591.00 |
| ONE-HALF | $197.00 | $295.50 | $394.00 |
| LESS THAN HALF-TIME | Tuition and Fees up to $197.00 | Tuition and Fees up to $295.50 | Tuition and Fees up to $394.00 |
| QUARTER OR LESS | Tuition and Fees up to $98.50 | Tuition and Fees up to $147.75 | Tuition and Fees up to $197.00 |
| **COOPERATIVE** | $394.00 | $591.00 | $788.00 |
| **APPRENTICESHIP /  ON-THE-JOB** **Training** | Rates are proportionally reduced if less than 120 hours is worked. | | |
| First 6 Months | $295.50 | $443.25 | $591.00 |
| Second 6 Months | $216.70 | $325.05 | $433.40 |
| Remainder of Program | $137.90 | $206.85 | $275.80 |
| **CORRESPONDENCE TRAINING:** Correspondence training is reimbursed at: 40% level gets 22%, 60% level gets 33%, and 80% level gets 44% of approved cost of the course. Entitlement is charged based on the rate of one month for a benefit amount equal to the full-time institutional rate. | | | |
| **FLIGHT TRAINING:** Flight training is reimbursed at: 40% level gets 24%, 60% level get 36%, and 80% level gets 48% of the approved cost of the course.  Entitlement is charged based on the rate of one month for a benefit amount equal to the full-time institutional rate. | | | |

**Table A.04. Chapter 1607 Historic Rate Table (Effective 10-01-2002)**

| **TYPE OF TRAINING** | **10-1-2002** | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **INSTITUTIONAL** | **Service of 90 days but less than one year** | **Service of 1 year +** | **Service of 2 years +** |
| **Monthly Rates in Dollars** | | | |
| FULL | $360.00 | $540.00 | $720.00 |
| THREE-QUARTER | $270.00 | $405.00 | $540.00 |
| ONE-HALF | $180.00 | $270.00 | $360.00 |
| LESS THAN HALF-TIME | Tuition and Fees up to $180.00 | Tuition and Fees up to $270.00 | Tuition and Fees up to $360.00 |
| QUARTER OR LESS | Tuition and Fees up to $90.00 | Tuition and Fees up to $135.00 | Tuition and Fees up to $180.00 |
| **COOPERATIVE** | $360.00 | $540.00 | $720.00 |
| **APPRENTICESHIP /  ON-THE-JOB** **Training** | Rates are proportionally reduced if less than 120 hours is worked. | | |
| First 6 Months | $270.00 | $405.00 | $540.00 |
| Second 6 Months | $198.00 | $297.00 | $396.00 |
| Remainder of Program | $126.00 | $189.00 | $252.00 |
| **CORRESPONDENCE TRAINING:** Correspondence training is reimbursed at: 40% level gets 22%, 60% level gets 33%, and 80% level gets 44% of approved cost of the course. Entitlement is charged based on the rate of one month for a benefit amount equal to the full-time institutional rate. | | | |
| **FLIGHT TRAINING:** Flight training is reimbursed at: 40% level gets 24%, 60% level get 36%, and 80% level gets 48% of the approved cost of the course.  Entitlement is charged based on the rate of one month for a benefit amount equal to the full-time institutional rate. | | | |

**Table A.05. Chapter 1607 Historic Rate Table (Effective 01-01-2002)**

| **TYPE OF TRAINING** | **01-01-2002** | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **INSTITUTIONAL** | **Service of 90 days but less than one year** | **Service of 1 year +** | **Service of 2 years +** |
| **Monthly Rates in Dollars** | | | |
| FULL | $320.00 | $480.00 | $640.00 |
| THREE-QUARTER | $240.00 | $360.00 | $480.00 |
| ONE-HALF | $160.00 | $240.00 | $320.00 |
| LESS THAN HALF-TIME | Tuition and Fees up to $160.00 | Tuition and Fees up to $240.00 | Tuition and Fees up to $320.00 |
| QUARTER OR LESS | Tuition and Fees up to $80.00 | Tuition and Fees up to $120.00 | Tuition and Fees up to $160.00 |
| **COOPERATIVE** | $320.00 | $480.00 | $640.00 |
| **APPRENTICESHIP /  ON-THE-JOB** **Training** | Rates are proportionally reduced if less than 120 hours is worked. | | |
| First 6 Months | $240.00 | $360.00 | $480.00 |
| Second 6 Months | $176.00 | $264.00 | $352.00 |
| Remainder of Program | $112.00 | $168.00 | $224.00 |
| **CORRESPONDENCE TRAINING:** Correspondence training is reimbursed at: 40% level gets 22%, 60% level gets 33%, and 80% level gets 44% of approved cost of the course. Entitlement is charged based on the rate of one month for a benefit amount equal to the full-time institutional rate. | | | |
| **FLIGHT TRAINING:** Flight training is reimbursed at: 40% level gets 24%, 60% level get 36%, and 80% level gets 48% of the approved cost of the course.  Entitlement is charged based on the rate of one month for a benefit amount equal to the full-time institutional rate. | | | |

**Table A.06. Chapter 1607 Historic Rate Table (Effective 10-01-2001)**

| **TYPE OF TRAINING** | **10-01-2001** | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **INSTITUTIONAL** | **Service of 90 days but less than one year** | **Service of 1 year +** | **Service of 2 years +** |
| **Monthly Rates in Dollars** | | | |
| FULL | $268.80 | $403.20 | $537.60 |
| THREE-QUARTER | $201.60 | $302.40 | $403.20 |
| ONE-HALF | $134.40 | $201.60 | $268.80 |
| LESS THAN HALF-TIME | Tuition and Fees up to $134.40 | Tuition and Fees up to $201.60 | Tuition and Fees up to $268.80 |
| QUARTER OR LESS | Tuition and Fees up to $67.20 | Tuition and Fees up to $100.80 | Tuition and Fees up to $134.40 |
| **COOPERATIVE** | $268.80 | $403.20 | $537.60 |
| **APPRENTICESHIP /  ON-THE-JOB** **Training** | Rates are proportionally reduced if less than 120 hours is worked. | | |
| First 6 Months | $201.60 | $302.40 | $403.20 |
| Second 6 Months | $147.84 | $221.76 | $295.68 |
| Remainder of Program | $94.08 | $141.12 | $188.16 |
| **CORRESPONDENCE TRAINING:** Correspondence training is reimbursed at: 40% level gets 22%, 60% level gets 33%, and 80% level gets 44% of approved cost of the course. Entitlement is charged based on the rate of one month for a benefit amount equal to the full-time institutional rate. | | | |
| **FLIGHT TRAINING:** Flight training is reimbursed at: 40% level gets 24%, 60% level get 36%, and 80% level gets 48% of the approved cost of the course.  Entitlement is charged based on the rate of one month for a benefit amount equal to the full-time institutional rate. | | | |

**Table A.07. Chapter 1607 Historic Rate Table (Effective 11-01-2000)**

| **TYPE OF TRAINING** | **11-01-2000** | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **INSTITUTIONAL** | **Service of 90 days but less than one year** | **Service of 1 year +** | **Service of 2 years +** |
| **Monthly Rates in Dollars** | | | |
| FULL | $260.00 | $390.00 | $520.00 |
| THREE-QUARTER | $195.00 | $292.50 | $390.00 |
| ONE-HALF | $130.00 | $195.00 | $260.00 |
| LESS THAN HALF-TIME | Tuition and Fees up to $130.00 | Tuition and Fees up to $195.00 | Tuition and Fees up to $260.00 |
| QUARTER OR LESS | Tuition and Fees up to $65.00 | Tuition and Fees up to $97.50 | Tuition and Fees up to $130.00 |
| **COOPERATIVE** | $260.00 | $390.00 | $520.00 |
| **APPRENTICESHIP /  ON-THE-JOB** **Training** | Rates are proportionally reduced if less than 120 hours is worked. | | |
| First 6 Months | $195.00 | $292.50 | $390.00 |
| Second 6 Months | $143.00 | $214.50 | $286.00 |
| Remainder of Program | $91.00 | $136.50 | $182.00 |
| **CORRESPONDENCE TRAINING:** Correspondence training is reimbursed at: 40% level gets 22%, 60% level gets 33%, and 80% level gets 44% of approved cost of the course. Entitlement is charged based on the rate of one month for a benefit amount equal to the full-time institutional rate. | | | |
| **FLIGHT TRAINING:** Flight training is reimbursed at: 40% level gets 24%, 60% level get 36%, and 80% level gets 48% of the approved cost of the course.  Entitlement is charged based on the rate of one month for a benefit amount equal to the full-time institutional rate. | | | |

**APPENDIX B**

---

**CHAPTER 1606 KICKER RATE TABLE**   
This appendix provides the kicker table for chapter 1606 benefits.  
  
**Table B.01. Chapter 1606 Kicker Rate Table**

| **LEVEL** | **KICKER RATE** |
| --- | --- |
| High | $350.00 |
| Medium | $200.00 |
| Low | $100.00 |