# Part 8: Chapter 8 - Miscellaneous

**Part 8: Chapter 8 - Miscellaneous**

[8.01 General](#8.01)  
[8.02 Background](#8.02)  
[8.03 VA Action](#8.03)  
[8.04 DoD Contact Points](#8.04)  
[8.05 Unresolved Problems with DoD Contact Points](#8.05)  
[8.06 [Reserved for Future Use]](#8.06)

**8.01  GENERAL**

---

        This chapter refers to information contained in Training Guide [(TG) 22-99-5,](https://vbaw.vba.va.gov/bl/22/ref/guides/TG229905/TOC.htm) The Chapter 1606 Training Guide.

**8.02  BACKGROUND**

---

        When benefits cannot be awarded because the DoD record does not show that the reservist is eligible, DoD will have to correct the record before VA can take any additional action.

        **a**.  A claimant in a Reserve Component (as opposed to a National Guard component) must contact the Reserve unit directly if there are any questions concerning eligibility information in the DoD record.  In cases involving service in the National Guard, the claimant should contact the National Guard Education Officer directly.

        **b**.  If the reservist is eligible for benefits, even though the DoD record shows otherwise, the unit (or Education Officer) must request correction of the DoD record.  The unit (or Education Officer) will transmit data to Defense Manpower Data Center (DMDC) under service department guidelines.

        **c.**  VA can subsequently award benefits only upon receipt of evidence indicating eligibility exists.  (See par 3.04.)

**8.03  VA ACTION**

---

        **a**.  After the Reserve unit (or Education Officer) has followed the normal DoD record correction procedures, the unit might still contact VA for assistance.  In this case, VA should urge the unit to contact the appropriate Reserve/Guard contact point.  If necessary, VA should give the unit the phone number and address of the appropriate contact point.  (See par. 8.04.)  VA should not give this phone number to individual reservists but should suggest that they contact their units.

        **b**.  After calling the contact point, a Reserve/Guard unit may contact VA claiming continued problems with the DoD record.  In this case, VA should determine when the unit called the contact point.  If the unit called the contact point within the previous 3 weeks, advise the unit to take no further action.  It will take about 3 weeks from the date of contact until the indication of eligibility appears on the Notice of Exception and on the DoD screen.  VA should inform the unit of this time frame.  VA should not routinely call the contact point until 3 weeks have past.  If the Reserve or Guard unit called the appropriate contact point more than three weeks ago, advise the unit to call the contact point again.

        **c.**  An individual reservist may contact VA stating that he or she has contacted his or her unit and the problem still exists.  In such cases, VA should contact the unit, or the contact point, or both if necessary to resolve the problem.

        **d**.  VA may receive a Veterans Assistance Inquiry (VAI) or Congressional Inquiry concerning the correction of the DoD record.  Follow the procedures in subparagraph c above in such cases.    

*NOTE:  If an enrollment certification or any other documentation is needed, take development action at the same time as action to notify the contact point.*

**8.04  DoD CONTACT POINTS**

---

        Education Service periodically publishes information concerning the DoD contact point(s).  If an RPO becomes aware of any changes when communicating with a contact point or has difficulty reaching a contact point, notify the Education Service, Strategy Development Staff (225B).  Send e-mail to "[VAVBAWAS/CO/225B](mailto:VAVBAWAS/CO/225B?subject=Part%208%3A%20Chapter%208%20-%20Miscellaneous)" or call (202) 273-7187.

**8.05  UNRESOLVED PROBLEMS WITH DoD CONTACT POINTS**

---

        If problems still exist after an RPO has contacted a DoD contact point, notify the Education Service, Strategy Development Staff (225B).  Send e-mail to "[VAVBAWAS/CO/225B](mailto:VAVBAWAS/CO/225B?subject=Part%208%3A%20Chapter%208%20-%20Miscellaneous)" or call (202) 273-7187.

**8.06  [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]**

---