# M22-4, Part 10, Compliance Survey. Chapter 04, Procedures Applicable to Facilities Offering Specific Types of Training.

**Part 10: Chapter 04-- Procedures Applicable to Facilities Offering Specific Types of Training.**

**[Subchapter 1](#SI). Areas of Review for Schools Offering Courses Leading to as Standard College Degree, Non-Degree Courses, or Both**  
  
[4.01  Verification of Enrollment Data](#401)  
[4.02  Pursuit of Approved Program or Course](#402)  
[4.03  Records and Reports of Enrollment, Changes in Enrollment, and Termination or Interruption](#403)  
[4.04  Records and Reports of Progress, Conduct, or Attendance](#404)  
[4.05  Restrictions on Percentage of Veterans and Eligible Persons Enrolled](#405)  
[4.06  Charges for Tuition and Fees](#406)  
[4.07  Additional Areas of Review for Courses Approved as Nonaccredited](#407)  
[4.08  Independent Study, Including Open Circuit TV](#408)  
[4.09  Residential Practical Training](#409)  
[4.10  Cooperative Programs (Other Than Farm Cooperative)](#410)  
[4.11  Farm Cooperative Programs](#411)  
[4.12  Verification of NCD Course Measurement](#412)  
[4.13  Branches](#413)  
[4.14  Tutorial Assistance](#414)  
[4.15  Education Loans](#415)  
[4.16  Conflicting Interests Certification (Proprietary Schools Only)](#416)  
[4.17  Conducting Remote Reviews](#417)  
  
**Figures**  
[4.1  Sample Notice of Remote Review](#f41)  
[4.2  Sample Attachment to Notice of Remote Review](#f42)  
  
**[Subchapter 2.](#SII) Areas of Review for Correspondence Schools**

[4.18  Combination Correspondence-Residence Programs](#418)  
[4.19  Verification of Enrollment Data](#419)  
[4.20  Records and Reports of Enrollment, Changes in Enrollment, and Termination or Interruption](#420)  
[4.21  Records and Reports of Progress, Conduct, or Attendance](#421)  
[4.22  Power of Attorney/Nonassignability of Benefits](#422)  
[4.23  Restrictions on Percentage of Veterans and Eligible Persons Enrolled](#423)  
[4.24  Charges for Tuition and Fees](#424)  
[4.25  Six-Month Normal Completion Time](https://vbaw.vba.va.gov/bl/22/ref/m22-4/Part%20X/ch04.htm#425)  
[4.26  Additional Areas of Review for Courses Approved as Nonaccredited](#425)  
  
**Figures**  
[4.3  Correspondence Refund Table (38 CFR 21.4256(a)(5))](#f43)  
  
**[Subchapter 3](#SIII). Areas of Review for Flight Schools**

[4.27  Verification of Enrollment Data](#427)  
[4.28  Pursuit of Approved Program or Course](#428)  
[4.29  Credit for Previous Education and Training](#429)  
[4.30  Records and Reports of Enrollment, Changes in Enrollment, and Termination or Interruption](#430)  
[4.31  Records and Reports of Progress, Conduct, or Attendance](#431)  
[4.32  Restrictions on Percentage of Veterans and Eligible Persons Enrolled](#432)  
[4.33  Charges for Tuition and Fees](#433)  
[4.34  Additional Areas of Review for Courses Approved as Nonaccredited](#434)  
[4.35  Possession of Valid Private Pilot Certificate or Higher Rating and Appropriate Medical Certificate](#435)  
  
**[Subchapter 4](#SIV). Areas of Review for Training Establishments**

[4.36  Verification of Enrollment Data](#436)  
[4.37  Credit for Previous Education and Training](#437)  
[4.38  Records and Reports of Enrollment, Changes in Enrollment, and Termination or Interruption](#438)  
[4.39  Wages Paid](#439)  
[4.40  Records and Reports of Progress, Conduct, or Attendance](#440)  
[4.41  Related Training](#441)  
[4.42  Training Agreement](#442)  
[4.43  Family Relationship](#443)  
  
**Figures**  
[4.4  Relationship of Hours Worked to Payment Units for Apprenticeship and On-the Job Training](#f44)

**SUBCHAPTER I**

******A****REAS OF REVIEW FOR SCHOOLS OFFERING COURSES LEADING TO A STANDARD COLLEGE DEGREE, NON-DEGREE COURSES, OR BOTH**********

********4.01 VERIFICATION OF ENROLLMENT DATA********

---

For general requirements and procedures see M22-4, Part 10, Compliance Survey. Chapter 03, Paragraph 3.04(a). Schools offering courses leading to a standard college degree are approved as IHL (institution of higher learning) facilities. Schools offering non-degree courses are approved as NCD (non-college degree) facilities. Schools offering both types of courses are approved as two separate facilities, one IHL and one NCD. Compliance surveys of both types of courses will normally be conducted simultaneously at such schools.

**a. Requirements.** The beginning date is determined in the same way for both IHL and NCD courses. ([38 CFR 21.4131(b) and (c)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=88fd7c32707f3bdaece8a14292733741&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14131); [21.7131(b) and (c)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=88fd7c32707f3bdaece8a14292733741&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17131); [21.7631(b) and (c)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=88fd7c32707f3bdaece8a14292733741&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17631); and [21.4203(b)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=88fd7c32707f3bdaece8a14292733741&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14203))

1. The beginning date of a resident course or unit subject is ordinarily the first scheduled date of classes for the term (semester, quarter, summer session, etc.).

2. The beginning date of a resident course or unit subject is the date the student reports to the school if the published standards of the school require both:

i. That the student register before reporting, and

ii. That the student report to the school not earlier than 14 days before, nor later than, the first scheduled date of classes for the term.

iii. The beginning date of a resident course or unit subject is the date of the first scheduled class in a particular course or unit subject when:

A. That date is after the calendar week in which the first scheduled date of classes for the term occurs, or

B. That date is more than 14 days after the date of registration.

iv. The beginning date of an independent study course or unit subject is the date the student begins the course according to school policy.

*NOTE: For Section 901, the beginning date of an IHL course is the date of registration or the date of reporting if the student is required by the school's published standard to report in advance of registration, but not later than the date the individual first reports for classes, and the beginning date of an NCD course is the first date of class attendance.* ([38 CFR 21.5831](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4cfb73ee8ca6b81cdbe0fedcea395f18&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15831))

**b. Review Procedures.** If the beginning date is other than the first scheduled date of classes for the term, review the school's calendar and policies to determine if it was properly certified.

**4.02 PURSUIT OF APPROVED PROGRAM OR COURSE**

---

For general requirements and procedures see Paragraph 3.05.

**a. Requirements.** In many cases, successful attainment of an educational or professional goal requires that the student be formally admitted ("matriculated") to a degree or professional program before, or within a reasonably brief time after, commencement of the program. Generally, this brief time will not be more than two terms or the equivalent. In addition, appropriate student classification may be required in order to graduate or successfully complete the program. ([38 CFR 21.4252(l)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4cfb73ee8ca6b81cdbe0fedcea395f18&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14252))

**b. Review Procedures.** Students may be pending matriculation for up to two terms and be considered as pursuing an approved program of instruction. If acceptance into a degree program or classification as a degree-seeking student is required by school regulation, verify through review of application, enrollment and progress records that the student has been accepted or appropriately classified.

**4.03 RECORDS AND REPORTS OF ENROLLMENT, CHANGES IN ENROLLMENT, AND TERMINATION OR INTERRUPTION** ([38 CFR 21.4135](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=00c5a418be6e9cda00d5bcd3e5a364ae&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14135), [21.4203](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=00c5a418be6e9cda00d5bcd3e5a364ae&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14203), [21.4204](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=00c5a418be6e9cda00d5bcd3e5a364ae&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14204), [21.5810](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=00c5a418be6e9cda00d5bcd3e5a364ae&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15810), [21.5812](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=00c5a418be6e9cda00d5bcd3e5a364ae&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15812), [21.7131](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=00c5a418be6e9cda00d5bcd3e5a364ae&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17131), [21.7631](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=00c5a418be6e9cda00d5bcd3e5a364ae&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17631))

---

For general requirements and procedures see Paragraph 3.04d.

**a. Requirements.** Schools must report quarter/semester credit hours or the weekly clock hours of attendance on the enrollment certification. Either credit or clock hours may be appropriate for both IHL and NCD courses, depending on how the course was approved. Schools must promptly report changes in credit/clock hours (unless the student is in a standard semester or quarter and remains full time) or the termination of attendance on VA Form 22-1999b, Notice of Change in Student Status. A prompt report is defined as one which is received by VA within 30 days after the change in credit/clock hours or termination of enrollment.

1. A school may officially designate a drop period at the beginning of the term, during which enrollment changes may be made, or without affecting the student's grade point average, e.g., a nonpunitive "W" grade may be assigned or the change may not be reflected on transcripts. If the school has officially designated a drop period of 30 days or less, the 30-day reporting period is computed from the last day of that period. If the school has officially designated a drop period of more than 30 days, the 30-day reporting period is computed from the 30th day of the term.

2. If the student's enrollment was certified for the school year and the student attended to the end of one term but failed to return for the following term, the 30-day reporting period may be computed from the last officially scheduled registration date for the following term.

3. For reduction in clock/credit hours of attendance or termination of attendance, NCD schools must report, in addition to the effective date of change or last date of attendance, the first date from which no credit accrued, if:

i. The instruction is organized on a block or unit basis; and,

ii. The block or unit must be repeated in its entirety (no credit for work completed).

4. Benefits are not payable for any or all IHL courses in which a nonpunitive grade is assigned when the effective date of withdrawal (last date of pursuit) is after the official drop period and mitigating circumstances are not shown to exist. The last date of pursuit is:

i. Residence Courses—Last date of attendance. (Last date of attendance may include regularly scheduled examination days, but does not include holiday periods if the student fails to attend at least 1 day after the holiday period.)

ii. Independent Study Courses—Official date of change in status under the practices of the institution.

iii. Cooperative Training—Date of last training.

5. IHLs cannot be required to maintain daily attendance records for courses leading to a standard college degree. ([38 USC 3685](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3685 edition:prelim))) Nonaccredited schools are required to have attendance standards. ([38 USC 3676(c)(7)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3676 edition:prelim))) Accredited NCD schools may have attendance policies. If a school does not maintain attendance records, it may determine last date of pursuit by any of the items of evidence listed below. (See M22-4, Part 01, General. Chapter 07, School Liability, Section 7.16.)

i. Last activity as reflected in the instructor's record

ii. Last papers submitted

iii. Last examination completed

iv. The student's reasonable statement of last day of attendance

6. Benefits are not payable for audited courses (courses which a student attends with a prior understanding between school officials and the student that no credit will be granted towards graduation). ([38 USC 3680(a)(3)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3680 edition:prelim)))

7. Benefits are not payable for repeating courses which, based upon school standards, have previously been successfully completed. Courses which have not been successfully completed include those for which a failing grade (F or the equivalent) was assigned and those for which a grade below the required minimum was assigned (D assigned when academic regulations pertaining to the course or program require at least a C).

**b. Review Procedures.** Verify the credit or clock hours certified by review of transcripts, grade reports and drop/add records. Review the grades assigned for all courses attempted to determine if courses for which a nonpunitive grade was assigned have been properly reported. Proper reports of changes and terminations submitted by the school should have resulted in correct effective dates and training time as shown on the compliance survey worksheet.

1. Determine if school has an attendance policy. (Nonaccredited schools are required to have attendance standards.) Review the school's basic enrollment and attendance records to determine the hours per day and days per week that veterans and eligible persons are attending. Determine if students are attending the schedule(s) approved by the SAA (State Approving Agency) by cross-checking daily and weekly hours of attendance against the course approval. Compare the enrollment data certified to the VA with the school records to determine if the school has promptly reported changes in credit or clock hours and terminations.

2. Changes in credit or clock hours must have been reported promptly (within 30 days) to VA. If changes were not reported, record the new credit or clock hours and the effective date of change. If the change involved a reduction of hours, and if the course is organized on a block or unit basis, determine whether the block or unit must be repeated in its entirety. If so, determine if the school properly reported the first date from which no credit accrued. If changes or terminations have not been properly reported, note the name of the course, credit or clock hour value, grade assigned and last date of course pursuit.

*NOTE: Pending a change to the regulations, schools are no longer required to report changes in credit hours which do not change students' full-time status during a standard quarter or semester only. For example, a change from 12 to 15 credit hours or vice versa need not be reported during a standard quarter. All changes involving less than full time pursuit or nonstandard terms must still be reported.*

3. Termination of attendance must also have been reported to VA within 30 days. Verify the last date of attendance by cross-checking the date reported with the instructor's or school's daily attendance record, if one is kept. If the course is organized on a unit or block basis and no credit accrued for the work completed, verify that the school also properly reported the first date from which no credit accrued.

**4.04 RECORDS AND REPORTS OF PROGRESS, CONDUCT, OR ATTENDANCE** ([38 CFR 21.4135(g)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=735fe85d5b5795153604c7ae0ab9b651&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14135), [21.4253(d)(2) and (4)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=735fe85d5b5795153604c7ae0ab9b651&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14253), [21.4254(c)(7)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=735fe85d5b5795153604c7ae0ab9b651&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14254), [21.4277](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=735fe85d5b5795153604c7ae0ab9b651&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14277))

---

For general requirements and procedures see Paragraph 3.04e.

**a. Requirements.** Adequate records must be kept by the school to show progress or grades, and satisfactory standards relating to progress, grades, and conduct must be enforced. For nonaccredited courses, attendance records must be kept, and an attendance standard must be enforced. For IHL courses, the school's progress standard is usually based on minimum grades or grade point average. For NCD courses, the school's progress standard may be based on minimum grades or grade point average, minimum attendance requirements, or a combination of these elements. Other acceptable progress criteria may be approved by the SAA.

1. An unsatisfactory grade is a punitive grade that is unacceptable for graduation based on the policies of the school. The following grades are considered unsatisfactory:

i. Punitive failing grades, i.e., an F or equivalent.

ii. Punitive grades below that required by the school, e.g., a D in a course when the school requires a C.

2. Incomplete grades ("I," "IP," or other designations) are disregarded when determining unsatisfactory progress because they reflect neither satisfactory nor unsatisfactory work.

i. Incomplete grades which are automatically converted to satisfactory grades counting toward graduation or to unsatisfactory punitive grades within one calendar year after the date on which the incomplete was assigned do not need to be reported to VA. Incomplete grades which are not converted within one year must be reported to VA for treatment as the equivalent of a nonpunitive withdrawal from the course.

ii. The procedures above do not apply to grading designations (including designation of incomplete) indicating continued enrollment in thesis or dissertation research courses leading to a graduate degree.

iii. Nonpunitive grades are disregarded when determining unsatisfactory progress since benefits are not paid for courses in which a nonpunitive grade is assigned unless mitigating circumstances exist.

**b.  Review Procedures.**

1. For all schools, review transcripts, grade reports and attendance reports to determine if progress has been satisfactory in accordance with the school's own standards, e.g., minimum grade or grade point average required. If progress has been unsatisfactory, note the effective date that progress first became unsatisfactory based upon school standards. Determine if the student was placed on academic probation and, if so, if the length of probation was in accordance with the school's own standards. If unsatisfactory progress should have been reported but was not, e.g., the student has been on probation in excess of the school's own standard and remains enrolled, determine the date that unsatisfactory progress should have been reported.

2. If the school has an attendance policy, review the policy and absence reporting procedures to determine if they are adequate for VA reporting purposes. While schools and students are not required to report absences on VA Form 22‑8979, Student Verification of Enrollment, (or certification of attendance letters for chapter 1606 beneficiaries), all schools with approved attendance standards are still required to maintain attendance records for their students and must notify VA whenever a student fails to meet the standard. For example, school regulations regarding attendance may provide that five unexcused absences in one term will result in mandatory discontinuance. Review the source record used as a basis for reporting absences (such as an instructor's attendance record) in addition to any secondary attendance records (such as those maintained at a central location) to determine compliance.

i. Review school regulations regarding attendance and determine if any students in the sample have exceeded the maximum number of excused or unexcused absences allowed.

ii. Confirm proper absence reporting procedures through class checks (especially weekend and night classes) and interviews with students and instructors.

iii. Determine through interviews if school officials are fully aware of attendance standards and reporting procedures.

**4.05 RESTRICTIONS ON PERCENTAGE OF VETERANS AND ELIGIBLE PERSONS ENROLLED** ([38 USC 3680A(d)](https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:3680a%20edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4201](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=f99216fcbbea3123e0245d441d5ac547&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14201))

---

**a.  Requirements.** The 85 percent enrollment limitation applies to IHL and NCD courses. Farm cooperative courses are excluded. Courses offered under contract with DOD (Department of Defense) on or adjacent to military bases and open only to active duty military personnel and their dependents (and civilian employees of a base, with waiver) are excluded. For additional information 85 percent enrollment limitations, exemptions, waivers, and computation of the 85 percent enrollment limitation, see M22-4, Part 09, Liaison and Approval Activities, Chapter 09, Miscellaneous, Section 9.15.

**b. Review Procedures.**

1. If the 35 percent reporting exemption is in effect, determine if the school's current (at the time of the survey) VA-supported enrollment is equal to or less than 35 percent. Convert part-time students to the equivalent number of full-time students in making the computation.

2. If the 35 percent reporting exemption has been withheld for any course or curriculum represented in the survey sample, verify through review of school enrollment records that the limitation is met for all such courses or curriculums.

**4.06 CHARGES FOR TUITION AND FEES** ([38 USC 3690](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3690 edition:prelim)))

---

**a. Requirements.** The school may not charge or receive from any veteran or eligible person any amount more than the established charges for tuition and fees which the school requires from similarly circumstanced students who are not VA beneficiaries and are enrolled in the same course. School policy for the payment or refund of tuition and fees which differs for students who are not VA beneficiaries and veterans or eligible persons may not have the effect of increasing charges to those students receiving VA benefits.

**b. Review Procedures.** During interviews with school officials, determine if school policies may exist for the payment or refund of tuition and fees which have the effect of increasing charges to veterans or eligible persons. If complaints have been received from veterans or eligible persons regarding the payment of such charges, review school financial records to determine the actual charges for both VA beneficiaries and students who are not VA beneficiaries.

**4.07 ADDITIONAL AREAS OF REVIEW FOR COURSES APPROVED AS NONACCREDITED** ([38 USC 3676](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3676 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4254](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=b30ea02dcaa42643d5aa834c4eb0c7ae&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14254))

---

**a. Requirements.** For schools or unit courses approved on a nonaccredited basis, the following areas of approval criteria must be reviewed during the compliance survey:

1. Students must be furnished a catalog or bulletin containing official policies with regard to tuition, fees, and other charges, refunds, grading system, course description, etc. ([38 USC 3676(c)(5)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3676 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4254(c)(5)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=b30ea02dcaa42643d5aa834c4eb0c7ae&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14254))

2. Enrollment must be within the limitations approved by the SAA. Enrollment limitations may be based on a maximum number of students for the institution and/or on student teacher ratios. ([38 USC 3676(c)(11)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3676 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4254(c)(11)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=b30ea02dcaa42643d5aa834c4eb0c7ae&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14254) and [21.4258(a)(5)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=b30ea02dcaa42643d5aa834c4eb0c7ae&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14258))

3. For students who terminate the course, a pro rata refund of tuition, fees and other charges is required in proportion to the amount of the course completed before withdrawal or discontinuance. The refund must be made promptly, i.e., within 40 days of the notice of termination. ([38 USC 3676(c)(13)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3676 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4254(c)(13)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=b30ea02dcaa42643d5aa834c4eb0c7ae&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14254) and [21.4255(a)(6)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=b30ea02dcaa42643d5aa834c4eb0c7ae&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14255))

**b.  Review Procedures.**

1. Confirm through a review of school records and school recruitment and registration procedures, or during optional student interviews, that students have received catalogs, brochures, or other official publications containing the required information.

2. During review of basic school enrollment records in connection with the 85 percent enrollment limitation and 35 percent reporting exemption, determine whether the total number of students enrolled is within the limitation established by the SAA.

3. For those students in the survey sample who have terminated their enrollments, review school financial records to determine if pro rata refunds of tuition, fees and other charges were made within 40 days of the notice of termination.

**4.08 INDEPENDENT STUDY, INCLUDING OPEN CIRCUIT TV** ([38 USC 3473](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3473 edition:prelim)), [3482](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3482 edition:prelim)), [3532](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3532 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4267](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=f99216fcbbea3123e0245d441d5ac547&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14267))

---

**a. Requirements.** Unit courses or programs pursued by independent study must lead to or be fully creditable toward a standard college degree. The course or program must provide for interaction between the student and the teacher (who must be a regularly employed faculty member) by any communications technology (i.e., mail, telephone, video conferencing, computer technology, etc.), in person, or by class attendance. Effective October 9, 1996, open circuit TV courses are considered the same as other independent study courses. Before that date, payment was made for open circuit TV courses on the same basis as for other independent study courses, except that no payment could be made unless the student was concurrently enrolled in at least one resident course.

**b. Review Procedures.** For those students in the survey sample who are pursuing independent study courses, verify through review of transcripts and grade reports the school's certifications of courses pursued by independent study and those pursued by resident training, if any. Confirm through interviews with school officials that the independent study courses being pursued are correctly described in the school catalog and that they provide for interaction between student and teacher. For students enrolled in open circuit TV courses before October 9, 1996, verify that the student was concurrently enrolled in at least one resident course.

**4.09 RESIDENTIAL PRACTICAL TRAINING** ([38 USC 3688(b)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3688 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4265 (a through d) and (f)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=f99216fcbbea3123e0245d441d5ac547&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14265))

---

Off-campus courses pursued at a training establishment, e.g., work-experience, practicum, etc., may be approved and pursued either as part of a resident institutional program or as part of a cooperative program. For cooperative programs, see [Section 4.10](#410) and [Section 4.11](#411) below.

**a. Requirements.**

1. Medical courses which include clinical training, e.g., nursing courses; medical or dental internships, residencies, and specialty courses, and non-medical professional internship programs must meet specific requirements for approval as residential institutional training. These are set out in detail in [38 CFR 21.4265(a) through (e)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=f99216fcbbea3123e0245d441d5ac547&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14265). 

2. Other courses which include work experience may be pursued as resident institutional training if they are accredited and meet the other requirements set out in detail in [38 CFR 21.4265(f)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=f99216fcbbea3123e0245d441d5ac547&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14265). 

**b. Review Procedures.** For students in the survey sample who are enrolled in practical training courses approved as residential institutional training, verify through interviews with school officials that the specific requirements applying to that type of practical training are being met.

**4.10 COOPERATIVE PROGRAMS (OTHER THAN FARM COOPERATIVE)** ([38 USC 3482(a)(2)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3482 edition:prelim)), [3532(b)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3532 edition:prelim)), and [3688](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3688 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4233(a)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=f99216fcbbea3123e0245d441d5ac547&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14233) and [21.4265(f)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=f99216fcbbea3123e0245d441d5ac547&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14265))

---

Off-campus courses pursued at a training establishment (work-experience, practicum, etc.) may be approved and pursued either as part of a cooperative program or as part of a resident institutional program. For residential practical training programs, see [paragraph 4.09](#409) above. For farm cooperative programs, see [Section 4.11](#411) below.

**a.  Requirements.**

1. The work-experience portion of a cooperative program may alternate with the classroom portion or be concurrent with it.  If alternating, the classroom phases must be at least as long as the work-experience phases. If concurrent, the classroom portion must be equivalent to residential training of at least one-half time, with the work-experience portion being sufficient for the combined training to equal full time.

2. The school must identify the program as cooperative in the school catalog.

3. The school must arrange directly with the employer for provision of substantial training supplementing the classroom portion of the course, and for placement of the student with the employer.

4. The school must exercise supervision and control over the work-experience portion of the program.

5. The school must grant credit for the work-experience portion of the program toward a degree or diploma objective.

6. Before October 9, 1996, if a student was enrolled in a cooperative program with alternating phases, he or she could elect to receive benefits during the classroom phase only. In that case, pursuit of the classroom phase could be at less than a full-time basis. Otherwise, pursuit was required to be at full-time, even though the rate of payment was 80 percent of the full-time institutional rate. Effective October 9, 1996, PL 104-275 provides that payment for cooperative training is at the same rate as institutional training, and all cooperative programs must be pursued at the full-time rate.

**b. Review Procedures.** Verify from school records that the course is properly identified in the catalog, and that credit is granted for the work-experience portion. Confirm through interviews with school officials that the school directly arranges for substantial instruction and student placement, and that the work-experience portion of the course is supervised and controlled by the school. Review individual student records to confirm that pursuit has been full time if required, and that the rate of payment is correct.

**4.11 FARM COOPERATIVE PROGRAMS** ([38 USC 3482(c)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3482 edition:prelim)) and [3532(c)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3532 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4233(d)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=49d88f6f94984f97735c1f02dbdcbfab&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14233) and [21.4264](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=49d88f6f94984f97735c1f02dbdcbfab&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14264))

---

Only DEA (Dependents Educational Assistance) beneficiaries may receive benefits based on enrollment in farm cooperative programs.

**a. Requirements.**

1. Students enrolled in farm cooperative courses must be concurrently engaged in relevant agricultural employment for an average of 40 hours per week. Temporary full-time employment is permissible if necessitated by a crop failure.

2. The school must verify on a continuing basis that students are engaged in suitable agricultural employment which is relevant to the institutional agricultural course offered by the school.

**b. Review Procedures.**

1. Verify that students are engaged in full-time agricultural employment which is relevant to the course by making a site visit to the place of employment to interview one eligible person. Obtain specific information regarding the student's employment, e.g. percentage of total income derived from agricultural employment, total acreage, crop acreage, livestock.

2. Review student application and enrollment records to determine if the school is verifying that each student is engaged in relevant agricultural employment. School records show information regarding each student's agricultural employment. Records may also include reports of visits made by instructors to each student's place of primary employment. Confirm through interviews with school administrators that student agricultural employment is verified by the school.

**4.12 VERIFICATION OF NCD COURSE MEASUREMENT** ([38 USC 3688](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3688 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4270](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=07897cf9794ab4bf740cb1bdafb5b06f&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14270))

---

**a. Requirements.** Only the requirements for full-time measurement are stated below. Part-time measurement is determined in accordance with [38 CFR 21.4270](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=07897cf9794ab4bf740cb1bdafb5b06f&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14270).

1. A trade or technical course involving shop practice as an integral part is measured on a full-time basis when a minimum of 22 clock hours per week attendance is required, with not more than 2-1/2 hours of rest periods and excluding supervised study.

2. A trade or technical course in which theoretical or classroom instruction constitute more than 50 percent of the required hours is measured on a full-time basis when a minimum of 18 hours per week net instruction is required. Net hours of instruction include intervals not to exceed 10 minutes between classes, supervised instruction in the school's shops, field trips, and group instruction. Net hours do not include supervised study, shop practice, rest periods, breaks for meals, or a 10-minute interval after the last class of the day. If intervals between classes are more than 10 minutes, that portion of the interval in excess of 10 minutes will be deducted in determining net clock hours of instruction. However, the school may achieve the required net clock hours by lengthening total class time per day.

3. When enrollment is measured on a clock hour basis, a high school diploma program is measured identically to a trade or technical course in which classroom instruction predominates. See subparagraph (2) immediately above. A high school diploma program is also measured on a full-time basis when students are pursuing it at a rate which would result in completion in 4 school years.

EXAMPLE: A high school diploma course requires 16 units for completion. The course is measured on a full-time basis when a minimum of four units per year is required.

4. A NCD course offered by a school other than an IHL on a standard quarter or semester credit-hour basis is measured identically to collegiate undergraduate training, provided the institution requires at least the same amount of clock hours as required for trade and technical courses in subparagraphs (1) and (2) above. Otherwise, the course will be measured in clock hours, as stated in subparagraphs (1) and (2) above.

5. A farm cooperative course consisting of institutional agricultural courses prescheduled to fall within 44 weeks of any 12 consecutive-month period is measured on a full-time basis when a minimum of 10 hours-per-week net instruction is required or 440 clock hours a year are prescheduled to provide not less than 80 hours of instruction in any 3-month period. Supervised instruction periods in school shops, time involved in field trips and individual or group instruction may be included. Part-time measurement is determined in accordance with [38 CFR 21.4270](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=07897cf9794ab4bf740cb1bdafb5b06f&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14270). Pursuit on a less-than-half-time basis is not permitted.

6. Other cooperative programs consisting of classroom instruction and work experience in a business or industrial establishment may not be measured on less than a full-time basis. If the classroom and portions alternate, each must be the equivalent of full-time training. If they are concurrent, the classroom portion must be equivalent to at least half-time training, and the work experience portion must be sufficient for the combined training to equal full time.

**b. Review Procedures.**

1. During preparation for the survey, review the approval file and catalog. Review class schedules for record and note hours of attendance per day and beginning and ending times of scheduled classes. During preparation for a remote review or during the site visit, obtain current class schedules for courses in the sample. Review these to determine if the required minimum hours of attendance or net instruction per week are provided.

2. Verify through class checks and student interviews the beginning and ending times of classes, break periods and meal periods. Determine if the hours of attendance or net instruction meet the minimum requirements for full- or part-time training.

3. Verify that supervised study is not counted in determining the hours of attendance or net hours of instruction.

4. For courses in which theory and class instruction predominate, verify that intervals between classes do not exceed 10 minutes. If intervals between classes are in excess of 10 minutes, deduct the time in excess of 10 minutes in determining net hours of instruction from the total time allotted the class by the school.

**4.13 BRANCHES** ([38 USC 3473](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3473 edition:prelim)); [3689 (b) & (c)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3689 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4201](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4b4fb04f6ed1f653491f7c7a0ccb8d8f&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14201), [21.4251](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4b4fb04f6ed1f653491f7c7a0ccb8d8f&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14251) and [21.4266](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4b4fb04f6ed1f653491f7c7a0ccb8d8f&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14266))

---

**a. Requirements.**

1. The approval for courses offered at a branch may be combined with the approval for courses offered at the parent facility only when the branch is located in the same State and one of the conditions listed in [38 CFR 21.4266](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4b4fb04f6ed1f653491f7c7a0ccb8d8f&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14266) exists.

2. If a course at a branch cannot qualify for combined approval, the course may be approved separately if the branch has an administrative capability. A branch has administrative capability when it:

i. Maintains the same records and accounts required of the parent facility by [38 CFR 21.4209](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4b4fb04f6ed1f653491f7c7a0ccb8d8f&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14209);

ii. Designates a certifying official; and

iii. Is able to furnish to VA without resort to the parent school all reports and certifications required by [38 CFR 21.4203](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=0fa35dcf9e0475401b1a73bfbf6c1df2&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14203) and [21.4204](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=0fa35dcf9e0475401b1a73bfbf6c1df2&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14204).

3. If a course at a branch cannot qualify for combined approval, and the branch does not have an administrative capability, the course may be approved separately if the parent facility:

i. Is within the same State;

ii. Maintains a centralized record system which can identify the records of students at each branch; and

iii. Specifies the branch location on enrollment certifications.

4. If a course at a branch cannot qualify for combined approval or separate approval under subparagraphs (1), (2), or (3) above, the course may not be approved.

5. If applicable, the 85 percent enrollment restriction (including the 35 percent reporting exemption provision) is applied separately to branches which have separate approval. See [Section 4.05](#405) above.

**b. Review Procedures.**

1. Branches with separate approval based on administrative capability are considered separate facilities from the parent school for compliance survey jurisdiction, scheduling and work measurement purposes. Surveys of these branches are conducted separately. During compliance surveys at branches with administrative capability, review school records and interview school officials to determine whether the branch maintains the required records and is able to furnish all required reports and certifications to VA without resort to the parent school.

2. During compliance surveys at parent institutions having branches exempt from administrative capability, review the records of students located at the branch location if such students are included in the sample. Site visits to such branches are not required. They may be made at the survey specialist's discretion, if there is reason to believe that the requirements of the law are not being met, e.g., inadequate facilities, classes not being held, violation of the 85 percent enrollment restriction. If a site visit is considered necessary, and the ESU (Education Services Unit) having jurisdiction of the branch location is different from the ESU having jurisdiction of the parent school, request the ESU with jurisdiction of the branch to conduct the site visit and assist in the completion of the survey.

3. For all branches with separate approval, verify that the branch is in compliance with the 85 percent enrollment restriction (including the 35 percent reporting exemption provision) and the two-year period of operation rule.

**4.14 TUTORIAL ASSISTANCE** ([38 USC 3492](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3492 edition:prelim)), [3533(b)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3533 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4236](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4b4fb04f6ed1f653491f7c7a0ccb8d8f&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14236)).

---

**a. Requirements.**

1. The veteran or eligible person must be pursuing a post-secondary program on at least a half- time basis and must have a deficiency in a subject which is required for, prerequisite to, or indispensable to the satisfactory pursuit of the student's approved program.

2. The school must certify that:

i. The tutorial assistance is essential to correct a deficiency;

ii. The tutor selected to provide tutorial services is qualified and is not the claimant's spouse, parent, child, brother, or sister; and

iii. The charges for tutorial services do not exceed the customary charges.

3. Tutoring must be provided on an individual basis. In some cases, however, tutoring may be provided to two or three students at one time if group discussion and interchange is necessary for a successful session.

**b. Review Procedures.**

1. For those students in the survey sample who have received tutorial assistance during the survey period, review transcripts to verify that the student was enrolled on at least a half-time basis during the period for which tutorial assistance was received. Determine if the course for which tutoring was received was necessary for the satisfactory pursuit of the student's approved program. Tutorial assistance may not be used solely to improve a grade, e.g., from a B to an A, but it may be used to improve a minimum grade creditable towards graduation requirements, e.g., from a C to a B, when a B is required in a major academic field.

2. Determine through interviews with school officials the policy for identification of qualified tutors. Does the school refer students to tutors known to be qualified in the subject matter, or do students select their own tutors? If the students select their own tutors, how does the school determine if they are qualified? Verify that close relatives do not provide tutorial services to claimants. Determine what the usual and customary charges are for tutorial services provided to VA beneficiaries and students not in receipt of VA educational benefits. In general, tutorial fees for VA beneficiaries may not exceed the charges to similarly circumstanced students not in receipt of VA educational benefits.

**4.15 EDUCATION LOANS** ([38 USC 3512](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3512 edition:prelim)), [3698](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3698 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR  21.4501](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=cc380238b20aeaff3a7891870e12adea&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14501))

---

 Education loans may be provided only to spouses or surviving spouses whose DEA (Dependents Educational Assistance) period of eligibility has expired and who have entitlement remaining.

**a. Requirements.** The spouse or surviving spouse must have been enrolled full-time on his or her delimiting date, or on the last date of the ordinary term, semester, or quarter preceding the delimiting date, if it fell during a school break or summer term. During the period for which the loan was granted the spouse or surviving spouse must have been enrolled full-time in the same program as that being pursued on the delimiting date (normal progression is permitted).

**b. Review Procedures.** Verify through review of transcripts and grade reports that loan recipients in the survey sample were enrolled on a full-time basis on the appropriate dates. Verify that enrollment for the loan period is in the same program as that being pursued on the delimiting date.

**4.16 CONFLICTING INTERESTS CERTIFICATION (PROPRIETARY SCHOOLS ONLY)**

---

**a. Requirements.** The law prohibits employees of VA and the SAA from owning any interest in an educational institution operated for profit. In addition, the law prohibits these employees from receiving any wages, salary, dividends, gifts, or services from private profit schools. These provisions may be waived if VA determines that no detriment will result to the government, or to veterans or eligible persons enrolled. ([38 USC 3683](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3683 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4005](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=e1898d8231fbf5d2470a62fe42a564a9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14005), [21.5001](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=e1898d8231fbf5d2470a62fe42a564a9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15001), [21.7305](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=e1898d8231fbf5d2470a62fe42a564a9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17305), [21.7805](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=e1898d8231fbf5d2470a62fe42a564a9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17805)) A VA regulation prohibits the approval of the enrollment of any veteran or eligible person in any proprietary school of which the veteran or eligible person is an official authorized to sign certificates of enrollment or verifications/certifications of attendance, an owner, or an officer. ([38 CFR 21.4202(c)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=e1898d8231fbf5d2470a62fe42a564a9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14202))

**b. Review Procedures.** Verify that the signature and information on VA Form 22-1919, Conflicting Interests Certification for Proprietary Schools Only, are current. If there has been any change, obtain a new VA Form 22-1919. The form must be signed by the president or chief administrative official of the school, e.g., chancellor, director of instruction. It should not be signed by the certifying official unless that person is also the president or chief administrative official. Determine through interviews with school officials and review of school records that the information is correct and that school officials are familiar with the provisions of the law and regulations on conflict of interest.

**4.17 CONDUCTING REMOTE REVIEWS**

---

Remote reviews may be conducted at any IHL or NCD school able and willing to cooperate. For instructions on soliciting schools for participation and on deciding when to conduct remote reviews and site visits, see Section 2.05.

a. Make prior arrangements with schools for remote reviews. Always discuss the remote review by telephone before sending the letter requesting documents. See [Figure 4.1](#f41) and [Figure 4.2](#f42). Note that these are only examples, and may be altered to suit individual schools, based on the prior telephone contact.

b. When doing remote reviews, generally follow the procedures in subparagraphs above. The basis of the remote review is a comparison among the transcripts, program plans, school calendar, education/DEA folder extracts, and BDN master records. Some items, e.g., advertising records, financial records of non-VA students, may not be fully examined in a remote review. These items should be annotated on VA Form 22-1934 as "Not Reviewed." Use alternate means to verify other items which would normally be reviewed in person. This will vary from school to school.

EXAMPLES:

* Current school publications (catalog, schedules, etc.).
* Local newspaper advertising and Yellow Pages.

Dear [Name of Certifying Official]:

This is to confirm our recent telephone conversation concerning the remote compliance survey option. Since you expressed a willingness to participate, we will perform the current survey using this procedure.

Please furnish the following documents for each student shown on the enclosed list:

1. An unofficial copy of the student transcript. This document should be complete and current through the last term completed by the student.

2. A copy of the student's program plan. This document is sometimes referred to as a degree audit, graduation checklist, curriculum guide sheet, academic advising checklist, etc. It should show the subjects required for successful completion of the student's program. If the student has pursued more than one program at your school, include program plans for each program.

3. A copy of the transfer credit evaluation form, if this information is not shown on the curriculum guide sheet or the student's transcript. This document should show the subjects for which credit has been granted toward the student's program, as a result of previous education, training, and experience. If the student has pursued more than one program at your school, please furnish a transfer credit evaluation form or similar document for each program. Please remember that "credit for previous education" is that which applies to the student's program and fulfills one or more requirements for successful completion of the program.

[Optional: 4. The enclosed VA Form 22-1919, Conflicting Interests Certification for Proprietary Schools Only, should be completed, signed by the school president, and returned with the other requested information.]

During the review of these records, it may be necessary to request copies of additional documents, such as add/drop slips, class schedule forms, etc. A determination as to whether these additional documents are needed will be made on a case-by-case basis. Clarifying information may also be requested by telephone or email.

The requested documents may be submitted by mail or email to my attention at this address; (include your email address).  For mail submission, please mark on your envelope: "DO NOT OPEN IN MAILROOM." The mailing address is:

ATTN.: [Name], ELR ([Mail routing symbol])  
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs Regional Office  
[Street Address]  
[City, State, Zip Code]

The authority for examination of these records is found in Title 38, United States Code, Section 3690(c). If you are not able to comply with this request within the next 2 weeks, or if you have questions, please contact [Name], Educational Liaison Representative, at [telephone number].

Sincerely yours,

[NAME]

Veterans Services Officer

Enclosures

**Figure 4.1 Sample Notice of Remote Review**

STUDENT RECORDS REQUIRED FOR COMPLIANCE SURVEY

School Name        

University of Learning, Anytown, California

Student Name                                       Claim Number                                       Social Security Number

John Q. Veteran                                    123-45-6789                                           123-45-6789

Jane D. Child                                         23-456-789-A                                         012-34-5678

**Figure 4.2  Sample Attachment to Notice of Remote Review**

Documents specifically requested for email or mail submission, such as attendance records, class schedules, advertising materials.  
   
Statements of school officials (for example, on the number of students in the school or in a given program)

**c**.  Properly document information obtained by telephone.  Use VA Form 119, Report of Contact, or cite date of contact, name and title of contact, and full information given and received in the narrative report.

**d**.  Do not routinely request that schools submit copies of enrollment certifications or other documents which have been submitted to VA.  When they are needed, request such documents from the RPO having the claimant's education folder (or from the Waco RO for awards under section 901).  Limit such requests to those documents which provide necessary information not available from BDN screens or elsewhere.  Avoid sending extensive requests to the RPO during periods of peak activity, such as fall enrollment.  Request copies of documents from the school only if they are not available from the folder.

**e**. Do not devise local forms to be completed by schools. You may request information to be given in a suggested format. However, schools must not be required to use that specific format.

**SUBCHAPTER 02. AREAS OF REVIEW FOR CORRESPONDENCE SCHOOLS**

**4.18 COMBINATION CORRESPONDENCE-RESIDENCE PROGRAMS**

---

Survey the correspondence portion of a combination correspondence-residence program in accordance with the instructions in this subchapter. Survey the residence portion of such a program in accordance with the instructions in Subchapter 01 above. ([38 CFR 21.4279](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=c1073773f42ce175e09e30bf81c5eefd&mc=true&node=pt38.2.21&rgn=div5#se38.2.21_14279))

**4.19 VERIFICATION OF ENROLLMENT DATA**

---

For general requirements and procedures see Paragraph 3.04a.

**a. Requirements.** For correspondence schools, the beginning date is the date the first lesson is sent to the student or the date the enrollment agreement is affirmed, whichever is later. During the preparation, compare the beginning date as certified by the school with the effective date of the award as shown on the compliance survey worksheet. ([38 CFR 21.4131(c)(2)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=3a5cba6797edc677ba3dc14d1e610099&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14131) and [21.4256(a)(3)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=3a5cba6797edc677ba3dc14d1e610099&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14256)) For additional information on affirmation of enrollment, see M22-4, Part 04, Award Issues. Chapter 02, Flight and Correspondence Training, Section 2.15.

**b. Review Procedures.** Review the school's records to determine if the affirmation was signed and dated 10 full days after the day on which the agreement was signed. Review school records to determine if any lessons were serviced before the date of affirmation. These lessons are non reimbursable.

**4.20 RECORDS AND REPORTS OF ENROLLMENT, CHANGES IN ENROLLMENT, AND TERMINATION OR INTERRUPTION** ([38 USC 3680(b)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3680 edition:prelim)))

---

For general requirements and procedures see Paragraph 3.04d.

**a. Requirements.**

1. Schools must report (by endorsement on VA Form 22-6553b, Certification of Lessons Completed) the number of lessons serviced. ([38 CFR 21.4203(e)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=3a5cba6797edc677ba3dc14d1e610099&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14203))

2. Schools must report student terminations not later than 30 days after the notification of termination is received from the student. ([38 CFR 21.4203(a) and (d)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=3a5cba6797edc677ba3dc14d1e610099&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14203)) The effective date of the termination is the date the last lesson is serviced. ([38 CFR 21.4135(e)(3)(i)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=3a5cba6797edc677ba3dc14d1e610099&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14135))

**b. Review Procedures.**

1. Review the school's basic records of enrollment and lessons sent to and returned by students. Verify that the lessons are those required for the course in which the student is enrolled. Review the school's records of lessons serviced to determine if they are adequate for reporting the number of lessons completed.

2. Review the school's basic records of lessons serviced to determine the dates the last lessons were serviced for terminated students. Review terminated students' files to determine if the school promptly reported terminations to the VA. Record any differences between the date the last lesson was serviced and the ending date shown on the worksheet.

**4.21 RECORDS AND REPORTS OF PROGRESS, CONDUCT, OR ATTENDANCE**

---

For general requirements and procedures see Paragraph 3.04e.

**a. Requirements.** For correspondence schools, the progress standard may include a specified rate for submission of lessons and suspensions because of inactivity. ([38 CFR 21.4253(d)(2)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=3a5cba6797edc677ba3dc14d1e610099&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14253))

**b. Review Procedures.** Review the school's records to determine if students have submitted lessons at the specified rate. If an individual's submission rate has been unsatisfactory, determine the date the school's standard was not met. Determine if reports were made accurately and promptly.

**4.22 POWER OF ATTORNEY/NONASSIGNABILITY OF BENEFIT**

---

For general requirements and procedures, see Paragraph 3.04g.

**a. Requirements.** Enrollment certifications cannot be accepted which show the correspondence school's address, post office box, or sales office address as the student's mailing address.

**b. Review Procedures.** Review school records to determine if VA educational benefit checks are being sent to the school's address.

**4.23 RESTRICTIONS ON THE PERCENTAGE OF VETERANS AND ELIGIBLE PERSON ENROLLED** ([38 USC 3473(d)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3473 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR  21.4201](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=9ec080de3374c12578f83eaf887408ba&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14201))

---

For general requirements and procedures, see [Section 4.05](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073742/M22-4,%20Part%2010,%20Compliance%20Survey.%20Chapter%2004,%20Procedures%20Applicable%20to%20Facilities%20Offering%20Specific%20Types%20of%20Training.#405).

**a. Requirements.** 

Vocational/Non-College Degree (NCD) Flight

1. The 85 percent enrollment restriction (including the 35 percent **exemption to report**) applies to flight schools and courses in general but does not apply to military aero clubs.

2. In determining if the 85 percent requirement is met, the review period is the 30 days preceding a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) beneficiary’s enrollment. Compare the hours of training completed by supported students (students drawing VA benefits under Title 38 or Title 10 and students supported by the Educational and Training Institute, or ETI) in the review period to the total hours of training completed by all students during the same period. See [Part 09, Chapter 09, Subpart 9.15](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000080125/Part%209:%20Chapter%209%20-%20Miscellaneous#915) for a description of the differences between supported and non-supported students when calculating the 85 percent enrollment ratio.

If the result is more than 85 percent, the enrollment restriction is not met and further certifications will not be approved until such time as the hours of training completed by supported students is equal to, or less than, 85 percent of the total. Make two separate computations, one for all training approved under [Federal Aviation Regulation (FAR) Part 141](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.141&r=PART), and one for all training approved under other parts of the FAR. Non-supported students (students drawing federal financial aid, third-party scholarships, and paying out of pocket) must be enrolled in the same approved program in order to be used in the 85 percent computation. See [Section 4.33](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073742/M22-4,%20Part%2010,%20Compliance%20Survey.%20Chapter%2004,%20Procedures%20Applicable%20to%20Facilities%20Offering%20Specific%20Types%20of%20Training.#433) regarding review of charges for students not receiving VA benefits who are used in the 85 percent computation.

i. For students enrolled in courses under [FAR Part 141](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.141&r=PART), base the computation on the actual hours of logged instructional flight time or the charges. Non-supported students who are used in the computation must have completed the requirements for a private pilot's license and must be enrolled in [FAR Part 141](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.141&r=PART) courses at the commercial pilot level or higher.

ii. For courses approved under [FAR Part 63](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title14/14cfr63_main_02.tpl), base the computation on ground training time in addition to actual logged instructional flight time or the charges accordingly.

iii. Courses under [FAR Part 61](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=02a2bbccb1d2c706e46104cdd8196da0&node=pt14.2.61&rgn=div5) can be approved only at a flight training center operating under a grant of exemption. Treat these courses together with those approved under the grant of exemption for the computation. Base the computation upon the total of all types of training (ground, simulator, actual instructional flight, etc.) or the charges.

iv. The flight time of an owner or officer of the flight school may not be included in computing the 85 percent ratio.

 Institution of Higher Learning (IHL) Flight

The requirements for IHL facilities with flight training programs are identical to the requirements outlined in [Part 10, Chapter 04, Subchapter 4.05](https://www.knowva.ebenefits.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_ssnew/help/customer/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001018/content/554400000073742/M22-4), with the following additional considerations:

1. The 85 percent enrollment restriction (including the 35 percent exemption) applies to IHL facilities and to their flight programs under [FAR Parts 61](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?c=ecfr&sid=40760189a03dfea0b501608f33820a45&rgn=div5&view=text&node=14:2.0.1.1.2&idno=14), [63](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title14/14cfr63_main_02.tpl), [141](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=22e31b7974e4942a5fa4a94751d0cca4&mc=true&node=pt14.3.141&rgn=div5), and [142](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=5c5dfbeb62dbbde618a525c5ad81882e&mc=true&node=pt14.3.142&rgn=div5).

2. In determining the 85 percent ratio, the facility must compare supported students (students drawing VA-benefits under Title 38 or Title 10 and students supported by the Educational and Training Institute, or ETI) and non-supported students (students drawing federal financial aid, third-party scholarships, and paying out of pocket).

3. The VA will provide a format for the submittal of the 85/15 ratio to all schools which will be required for usage unless a school has received specific approval to submit in a different format.  Regardless of the method, the information that is required to be sent to the VA must be present.

4. The State Approving Agency (SAA) may approve various flight training “tracks” pertaining to specific degree majors or concentrations.  The 85 percent ratio must be calculated separately for each track or concentration. 

5. Deviations from the SAA approved content or length of a program, as well as any differences from the approved cost and/or equipment used, may also require a facility to seek approval for such “new” programs, and would require separate 85 percent ratio calculations.

 

**b. Review Procedures.** 

Vocational/NCD Flight

1. For the most recent VA student's enrollment or reenrollment at the school, regardless of whether he or she is in the review sample, list the verified beginning date for date of enrollment (see [Paragraph 4.27(b)(2)](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073742/M22-4,%20Part%2010,%20Compliance%20Survey.%20Chapter%2004,%20Procedures%20Applicable%20to%20Facilities%20Offering%20Specific%20Types%20of%20Training.#427b2)). If the school has a history of exceeding the 85 percent enrollment limitation, also check each VA student in the survey sample who has enrolled or reenrolled in a flight course after the date of the last survey.

2. From the daily flight record for the 30 days preceding each enrollment, list all supported students and non-supported students who completed training under the same part of the FAR (e.g., [Part 61](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=8532b9e0986c3bcbc2a2e44d58fa9008&mc=true&node=pt14.2.61&rgn=div5), [Part 141](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.141&r=PART)). Verify and compute the ratio of hours of training completed by supported students to the total of hours of training completed by all students.

i. Cross-check the entries on the daily flight record through review of pilot logs and invoice tickets to verify that all supported students' flight time is listed on the daily record. Also verify that the flight time of non-supported students was instructional in nature. In computing the ratio, exclude flight time for business or pleasure purposes by non-supported students.

ii. Review the training records of non-supported students to verify that they are enrolled in the same approved program under the same part of the FAR as the supported students. Exclude flight time for private pilot training, or for [FAR Part 61](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=8532b9e0986c3bcbc2a2e44d58fa9008&mc=true&node=pt14.2.61&rgn=div5) training unless offered at a flight training center operating under a grant of exemption.

iii. Cross-check the charges for non-supported students through review of invoice tickets and school financial records to ensure that flight charges are not waived or rebated, completely or in part, by the school.  If the training is given at a reduced charge to students not receiving VA benefits, include that time in the supported student part of the computation. (See [Section 4.33](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073742/M22-4,%20Part%2010,%20Compliance%20Survey.%20Chapter%2004,%20Procedures%20Applicable%20to%20Facilities%20Offering%20Specific%20Types%20of%20Training.#433) regarding review of charges.)

3. For flight engineer, flight navigator and similar courses, verify the separate computation for the most recent VA student's enrollment through review of training records and school financial records. Ensure that non-supported students and supported students used in the separate computation for these courses are enrolled on the same basis and pay the same charges as VA students in flight courses.

4. Exclude all flight time of owners or officers of the school in computing the ratio.

5. If the 85 percent enrollment limitation is not met for the latest VA student's enrollment and this was the only enrollment to be verified because the school had a good 85 percent compliance history, expand the area of review. Make an 85 percent computation for all VA students in the survey sample, in order to determine if the violation is isolated or involves other cases.

6. If VA has granted the school a 35 percent exemption to report, indicating that not more than 35 percent of its students are VA students, review the 30-day period preceding the date of the last VA student's enrollment and verify the certification. The review should be based on the most recent VA student's enrollment, regardless of whether the case is contained in the review sample.

     **IHL Flight (Update May 11, 2020)**

The review procedures for IHL facilities with flight training programs are identical to the review procedures outlined in [Part 10, Chapter 04, Subchapter 4.05](https://www.knowva.ebenefits.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_ssnew/help/customer/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001018/content/554400000073742/M22-4), with the following additional considerations:

1. 85/15 computations must be reviewed for every term within the survey period. If modular terms not listed in the catalog are used for flight courses, then 85/15 calculations must be performed for each enrollment period. 

2. For contracted courses, the IHL is responsible for the reporting of 85/15 and must insure the contracted vocational/NCD or IHL facility is not using the contractor’s students within their reportable 85/15 calculations. 

3. Methods by which IHL students pay on account vary. Review all methods to determine if veteran students are eligible to use each of the differing methods or not.

**Note:** Variations in types of payments that students can use will affect 85/15 computations.

4. All communications sent to instructors, advisors, or any other faculty members that are seen to have any relations to the registration for paying and/or waiver of costs pertaining to flight courses must be made available to the reviewer upon request.

**4.24 CHARGES FOR TUITION AND FEES** ([38 USC 3686(b) and (c)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3686 edition:prelim)))

---

For general requirements and procedures, see [Section 4.06](#406).

**a. Requirements.**

1. Benefits for correspondence courses are not payable under section 901, and are not payable to children under chapter 35. ([38 CFR 21.4252(e)(2)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=9ec080de3374c12578f83eaf887408ba&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14252); [21.5800(b)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=9ec080de3374c12578f83eaf887408ba&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15800)) Benefits for correspondence courses are payable under chapters 30, 1606, and 35 (spouses and surviving spouses only) at 55 percent of the approved charges. ([38 CFR 21.3131(a)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=9ec080de3374c12578f83eaf887408ba&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_13131); [21.7139(i)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=9ec080de3374c12578f83eaf887408ba&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17139); and [21.7639(e)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=9ec080de3374c12578f83eaf887408ba&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17639)) Benefits for correspondence courses are payable under chapter 32/Section 903 at 100 percent of the approved charges. ([38 CFR 21.5138(a)(2) and (b)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=9ec080de3374c12578f83eaf887408ba&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15138))

2. If a student does not affirm an enrollment, the school, whether accredited or nonaccredited, must make a full refund of any amount paid. ([38 CFR 21.4256(a)(4)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=9ec080de3374c12578f83eaf887408ba&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14256)) If a student does affirm an enrollment, but terminates without completing the course, the school must refund a portion of the charges. If the course is approved as nonaccredited (before February 2, 1995), see [Section 4.26](#426) below. ([38 CFR 21.4254(c)(13)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=9ec080de3374c12578f83eaf887408ba&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14254)) If the course is approved as accredited, the refund must be as shown in [Figure 4.3](#F43). ([38 CFR 21.4256(a)(5)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=9ec080de3374c12578f83eaf887408ba&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14256)) This information should be clearly stated on the school's enrollment agreement. ([38 CFR 21.4256(a)(1)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=9ec080de3374c12578f83eaf887408ba&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14256))

| Percent of Completed Lessons | Maximum Which School May Retain |
| --- | --- |
| 0 percent (Termination after affirmation - no lessons completed) | Registration fee not to exceed 10 percent of tuition for the course or $50, whichever is less |
| Less than 25 percent | Registration fee plus 25 percent of tuition |
| 25 percent but less than 50 percent | Registration fee plus 50 percent of tuition |
| 50 percent or more | No refund required |

**Figure 4.3.  Correspondence Refund Table** ([38 CFR 21.4256(a)(5)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=9ec080de3374c12578f83eaf887408ba&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14256))

3. The school must make prompt refunds to students who do not affirm or who terminate the course. A refund is considered prompt when it is made within 40 days of the date of receipt of a notice of termination or disaffirmance. ([38 CFR 21.4256(a)(7)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=d8ebe872775b33ff0468c4798c2e49f7&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14256))

**b. Review Procedures.**

1. Review the school's financial records to ensure that the amounts reimbursed by the VA have not exceeded the rates of reimbursement rates indicated in subparagraph a(1) above.

2. Review school financial records and interview school officials to determine if the required refund policies are being followed.

3. For students who terminated their enrollments, review school financial records to determine if refunds were made within 40 days of the notice of termination.

**4.25 SIX-MONTH NORMAL COMPLETION TIME** ([38 USC 3680(a)(5)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3680 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4256(a)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=d8ebe872775b33ff0468c4798c2e49f7&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14256))

---

**a. Requirements.** Completion time for a course is the time between the date the first lesson is sent to the student and the date the last lesson is received by the school. A minimum of six months normal completion time for correspondence courses has long been a requirement. PL 103-446 made this requirement an approval criterion effective February 2, 1995. Before that date, this requirement was a limitation on payment of VA benefits, but was not an approval criterion.

1. For courses approved before February 2, 1995, the current approval criterion must be met in order to remain approved. To meet it, the school offering the course must certify that 50 percent of those completing the course require a minimum of six months to complete it. The school must base this certification upon the experience of students who completed the course during the six month period immediately preceding February 2, 1995.

2. For courses approved on or after February 2, 1995, the current approval criterion must be met for initial approval. To meet it, the school offering the course must certify that 50 percent of those completing the course require a minimum of six months to complete it. The school must base this certification upon the experience of students who completed the course during the six month period immediately preceding the date of application for approval.

i. If a school can show that several correspondence courses are required to reach an objective, so that taken together they constitute a single program of education, the criterion may be applied to their combined completion time. This does not apply to combination correspondence-residence courses.

EXAMPLE: Three correspondence courses, each with a normal completion time of two months, constitute a program of education. The program may be approved, because the combined normal completion time is six months. However, the individual courses may not be approved, because their separate normal completion times are less than the minimum.

ii. For combination correspondence-residence courses, the criterion is applied to the combined completion time. However, individual combination correspondence-residence courses may not be further combined for completion time computations, even when they may be taken together with other correspondence courses to constitute a single program of education.

EXAMPLE: The normal completion time for the correspondence portion of a course is five months and the normal completion time for the residence portion is one month. The combination course may be approved, because the combined normal completion time is six months.

**b. Review Procedures.** Review school records to verify the accuracy of the school's certification. A sample of 10 percent or more of the graduates may be utilized. However, a 100 percent review is required if the sample does not meet the requirement. If this approval criterion is not met after a 100 percent review, refer the discrepancy to the SAA see M22-4, Part 10, Compliance Survey, Chapter 06, Referrals, Section 6.01).

1. For courses approved before February 2, 1995, verify that 50 percent of the graduates during the six month period immediately preceding February 2, 1995, required a minimum of six months to complete the correspondence course or combined correspondence-residence course.

2. For courses approved on or after February 2, 1995, verify that 50 percent of the graduates during the six month period immediately preceding the date of the application for approval required a minimum of six months to complete the correspondence course, program of education consisting of several correspondence courses, or combined correspondence-residence course.

**4.26 ADDITIONAL AREAS OF REVIEW FOR CORRESPONDENCE COURSE APPROVED AS NONACCREDITED** ([38 USC 3676](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3676 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4254](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=9f951510a5664849e5fa34a39cb8b41c&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14254))

---

For general requirements and audit procedures, see [Section 4.07](#407).

*NOTE: PL 103-446 modified the approval criteria for correspondence courses beginning on or after February 2, 1995. As of that date, a correspondence course and the correspondence portion of a correspondence-residence course may only be approved if offered by an educational institution that is accredited by an agency recognized by the Secretary of Education. However, an institution which was approved as nonaccredited before February 2, 1995, and retained approval by becoming accredited must have met the following requirements for periods before February 2, 1995, or the effective date of approval as accredited, whichever is earlier.*

**a. Requirements.**

1. Students must be furnished a catalog or bulletin containing the approved course outline and approved schedule of charges. ([38 USC 3676(c)(5)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3676 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4254(c)(5)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=9f951510a5664849e5fa34a39cb8b41c&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14254))

2. Enrollment must be within the limitations approved by the SAA. ([38 USC 3676(c)(11)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3676 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4254(c)(11)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=9f951510a5664849e5fa34a39cb8b41c&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14254))

3. For students who terminate a correspondence course, a pro rata refund of tuition and fees is required based upon the number of lessons serviced by the school. A registration fee of not more than $10 is not subject to proration. For registration fees in excess of $10, the amount exceeding $10 is subject to proration. ([38 USC 3676(c)(13)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3676 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4254(c)(13)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=9f951510a5664849e5fa34a39cb8b41c&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14254))

**b. Review Procedures.**

1. Confirm through a review of school records and school recruitment and registration procedures that students have received catalogs or brochures. The required information may also be included in the enrollment agreement.

2. Correspondence courses usually do not have enrollment limitations. However, the residence portion of a combination course should have an enrollment limitation. Through a review of school records, determine total number of students presently enrolled and if this number is within the limitation established by the SAA.

3. For students who terminated their enrollments, review school financial records to determine if pro rata refunds were made within 40 days of the notice of termination. (See [Paragraph 4.24(a)(3)](#424a3).)

**SUBCHAPTER 03. AREAS OF REVIEW FOR FLIGHT SCHOOLS**

**4.27 VERIFICATION OF ENROLLMENT DATA**

---

For general requirements and procedures see [Paragraph 3.04](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073640/M22-4,%20Part%2010,%20Compliance%20Survey.%20Chapter%2003,%20Compliance%20Survey%20Procedures.).

1. **Requirements.**

**Non-College Degree (NCD)/Vocational Flight** 

1. Students must be pursuing the same course as certified by the school on [VA Form 22-1999, VA Enrollment Certification](https://www.vba.va.gov/pubs/forms/vba-22-1999-are.pdf?_ga=2.18213945.1206357025.1555902018-524815269.1555902018), and [VA Form 22-6553c, Monthly Certification of Flight Training](https://www.vba.va.gov/pubs/forms/VBA-22-6553c-ARE.pdf), and [38 CFR 21.3030](https://ecfr.io/Title-38/Section-21.3030), [21.5131](https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/38/21.5131), [21.7130](https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/38/21.7130), and [21.7630](https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/38/21.7130) guidance.
2. Students must possess a valid unlimited private pilot license or higher rating and complete the commercial pilot course before enrolling in any other flight course. ([38 CFR 21.4263](https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/38/21.4263))
3. Students must have a current medical certificate valid for second class privileges and it is required before the first day of training with the exception of all but Airline Transport Pilot (ATP) and[14 CFR Part 142](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.142&r=PART) ratings, which requires a first class medical certificate valid for first class privileges. ([38 CFR 21.4263](https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/38/21.4263))
4. Flight schools are required to accurately and promptly report enrollment, lessons serviced, and all flight training hours and charges. ([38 CFR 21.4203(f), (g)),](https://www.govregs.com/regulations/38/21.4203) [21.4204,](https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/38/21.4204) [21.7156](https://www.govregs.com/regulations/expand/title38_chapterI_part21_subpartK_subjgrp292_section21.7156#title38_chapterI_part21_subpartK_subjgrp292_section21.7156), [21.9735](https://www.govregs.com/regulations/expand/title38_chapterI_part21_subpartP_subjgrp337_section21.9735))
   1. The beginning date of the flight training course is the first date the student received either ground school or flight instruction.

               **Institution of Higher Learning (IHL) Flight (Updated May 11, 2020)**

1. Students must be pursuing a degree program where flight courses are deemed necessary to complete the program. Students must complete the commercial pilot course before enrolling in any other subsequent flight course listed within the degree program.
2. Students must possess a medical certificate valid for second class privileges and it is required before student’s first day of training in all but ATP and [Part 142](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.142&r=PART) ratings, which requires a first class medical certificate valid for first class privileges. ([38 CFR 21.4263](https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/38/21.4263))
3. Flight schools are required to accurately and promptly report enrollment, lessons serviced, and all flight training hours and charges ([38 CFR 21.4203(f), (g](https://www.govregs.com/regulations/38/21.4203))), [21.4204](https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/38/21.4204), [21.7156](https://www.govregs.com/regulations/expand/title38_chapterI_part21_subpartK_subjgrp292_section21.7156#title38_chapterI_part21_subpartK_subjgrp292_section21.7156), [21.9735](https://www.govregs.com/regulations/expand/title38_chapterI_part21_subpartP_subjgrp337_section21.9735))

**Note:** The beginning date of the flight training course is the first date the student received either ground school or flight instruction.  IHL programs are based on both standard and non-standard terms.  Flight training within fixed terms must begin within the first 7 days of the reported initial date of the term. 

1. **Review Procedures.**

**NCD/Vocational Flight Programs**

1. Verify through a review of pilot logs, invoice tickets, and the daily flight records for the course in which the Veteran is currently enrolled is the same as that certified by the school on [VA Form 22-1999](https://www.vba.va.gov/pubs/forms/vba-22-1999-are.pdf?_ga=2.18213945.1206357025.1555902018-524815269.1555902018) and VA Form 22-6553c. Ensure that the aircraft tail number matches the tail numbers listed in the institutes catalog of applicable aircraft. Training records required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) may also be reviewed to verify enrollment in a specific course.  Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) requires the school to maintain a current and accurate record of every student's accomplishment in all approved courses.
2. Determine through a review of the claim folder and school records the student had the appropriate medical certificate on the first day of training. The school is required to keep a copy of each medical certificate in the student’s file.  In addition, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) requirements (which aligns with the FAA requirements) requires NCD/vocational schools to maintain records for 3 years following the ending date of the last enrollment period. [(38 CFR 4209(f)(1))](https://www.govregs.com/regulations/expand/title38_chapterI_part21_subpartD_subjgrp234_section21.4209#title38_chapterI_part21_subpartD_subjgrp234_section21.4209)
3. For each student in the survey sample, document the name of the current flight course on the compliance survey worksheet. If necessary, correct the course code. Ensure the flight time documented in the flight log match time submitted to the VA. Determine through a review of the claim folder and school records the Veteran, Service member, or Reservist actually began the flight training course, with ground school instruction, flight instruction, or both, on the date reported by the school reported in item 19B of the [VA Form 22-1999](https://www.vba.va.gov/pubs/forms/vba-22-1999-are.pdf?_ga=2.18213945.1206357025.1555902018-524815269.1555902018), and a change of program was not charged, and the enrollment has remained continuous. Enrollment is continuous as long as there is no period greater than 6 months between the exact date the last flight instruction was received and the date the next flight instruction is received. A change of schools will not break the continuity of enrollment unless a change of program is also involved. Verify through review of pilot logs, invoice tickets, and ground school records, the first date of training certified by the school as shown on the compliance survey worksheet, under "Effective Date". (Use the verified first date of training as the basis for reviewing the 85 percent enrollment computation for each student in the sample. See [Paragraph 4.32(b)](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073742/M22-4,%20Part%2010,%20Compliance%20Survey.%20Chapter%2004,%20Procedures%20Applicable%20to%20Facilities%20Offering%20Specific%20Types%20of%20Training.#432b).)
4. Review the names and qualifications of the pilots listed in the flight charter for the institute. Ensure they are qualified to perform as pilots per the FAA for the type of aircraft certified to the FAA.

            **IHL Flight (Added May 11, 2020)**

1. Verify through a review of pilot logs, invoice tickets, and the daily flight record the course in which the Veteran is currently enrolled is the same as course certified by the school and part of the degree program being pursued. Ensure that the aircraft tail number matches the tail numbers listed in the institutes catalog of applicable aircraft. Training records required by the FAA may also be reviewed to verify enrollment in a specific course.  FAR requires the school to maintain a current and accurate record of each student's accomplishment in each approved course.
2. Determine through a review of the claim folder and school records the student had the appropriate medical certificate on the first day of training. The school is required to keep a copy of each medical certificate in the student’s file. The VA has different requirements for maintaining records that must be followed.  The FAA requires documents to be maintained for 3 years after receipt of the certification.  The VA requires schools to maintain flight records for 3 years following the ending date of the last enrollment period. [(38 CFR 4209(f)(1))](https://www.govregs.com/regulations/expand/title38_chapterI_part21_subpartD_subjgrp234_section21.4209#title38_chapterI_part21_subpartD_subjgrp234_section21.4209)  This is also a requirement when contracting with an NCD/vocational, the IHL is required to maintain all records for flight at their school location.

* IHLs contracting with any other entity must ensure all beneficiary records, to include flight records, are maintained for the required time period by the degree issuing institution.

1. Verify through a review of the claim folder and school records that the Veteran, Service member, or Reservist actually began the flight training course, with ground school instruction, flight instruction, or both, within 7 days of the reported beginning date of the term and the enrollment has remained continuous. Flight labs conducted by an IHL must be performed as all other lab courses listed within the school in a rigid flight schedule showing completion prior to the last date of term was given to the student as part of the standard of progress. As with other IHL programs, the 85/15 calculation is based on terms, supported versus unsupported students enrolled, and contracted NCD/vocational facilities cannot use IHL students flying under the contracted program with an IHL for their 85/15 calculation.

1. Review the names and qualifications of the pilots listed in the flight charter for the institute. Ensure they are qualified to perform as pilots per the FAA for the type of aircraft certified to the FAA.

**4.28 PURSUIT OF APPROVED PROGRAM OR COURSE**

---

For general requirements and procedures see Paragraph 3.04b.

**a. Requirements.**

1. Concurrent enrollment in two or more flight courses is not permitted except when the course has been approved by the FAA and the SAA as a combined commercial pilot-instrument course, or as a special curriculum course leading to a certificate or rating normally obtained through pursuit of two separate courses.

2. All or part of a flight training program may be furnished by another school or entity under contract. The contractor providing the training must obtain approval of the course by the appropriate SAA. ([38 CFR 21.4233(e)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=f338b9a5b811c8fabbbd0987339a8b21&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14233))

**b. Review Procedures.**

1. Determine through comparison of school and VA records that the courses in which students in the sample are enrolled have been properly approved.

2. The fact of contracted training may not be of record in the approval file. Therefore, during interviews with school officials, this area should be explored to determine if the school actually does contract out any training. For example, if a flight school located at a small airport is approved to offer flight engineer training and school facilities are obviously not sufficient to provide such training, ask where the training was provided.

**4.29 CREDIT FOR PREVIOUS EDUCATION AND TRAINING**

---

For general requirements and procedures see Paragraph 3.04c.

1. **Requirements.**

Vocational/Non-College Degree (NCD) Flight

1. The flight school must maintain a record of Department of Veteran Affairs (VA) student’s previous education and training, grant appropriate credit for previous education and training, shorten the student's course proportionately and notify the student and the VA of any course changes or modifications. ([38 CFR 21.4253(d)(3)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=f338b9a5b811c8fabbbd0987339a8b21&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14253); [21.4254(c)(4)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=f338b9a5b811c8fabbbd0987339a8b21&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14254))

2. Under Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR), course credits may be transferred in whole or in part from one certificated school to another (A "certificated" school is one that has its flight training courses approved under [FAR Parts 141](https://www.faa.gov/licenses_certificates/airline_certification/pilotschools/) or [142](https://www.faa.gov/pilots/training/part_142/).). The receiving school must determine the amount of previous training to be transferred and accepted, based on a written and flight test. However, be mindful of the following Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) rules relating to prior credit:

* FAA 50% Rule for prior credit from another [14 CFR Part 141](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.141&r=PART) course: Even when transferring from another [Part 141](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.141&r=PART) school, the current school must require the student to pursue at least 50% of the syllabus hours.  ([14 CFR 141.77 ( c ) (1)&(2](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.141&r=PART))
* FAA 25% Rule for prior credit from [Part 61](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=8532b9e0986c3bcbc2a2e44d58fa9008&mc=true&node=pt14.2.61&rgn=div5) training:  The [Part 141](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.141&r=PART) pilot school must require the student to pursue at least 75% of the syllabus hours.  ([14 CFR 141.77 ( c ) (3)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.141&r=PART))

3.  Course credits may not be transferred from a non-certificated school to a certificated school.

4. Schools holding examining authority under [FAR 141, Subpart D](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.141&r=PART), may recommend graduates of its approved certification courses for pilot certificates and ratings except for flight instructor certificates, Airline Transport Pilot (ATP) certificates and ratings, and turbojet type ratings, without the student taking the FAA flight or written test, or both.  However, the student must have graduated from the course of training offered at the school. Schools with examining authority must consider and grant appropriate credit for previous experience and training of VA students. Therefore, students when enrolled in schools with examining authority must take the required FAA written or flight test, or both, as appropriate. This means a student can take part of a course at one [FAR 141](https://www.faa.gov/licenses_certificates/airline_certification/pilotschools/) certificated school, transfer to another [FAR 141](https://www.faa.gov/licenses_certificates/airline_certification/pilotschools/) certificated school, graduate from the course, and have the second school recommend him/her for a pilot certificate or rating.

5. If a VA student has passed the FAA written examination for a rating or certificate before enrolling in a flight course, the student must be credited with no less than 50 percent of the required ground school hours for the course. If ground school training in preparation for the test was received at a certificated school, full credit would normally be given. However, under [FAR 141.77,](https://www.faa.gov/licenses_certificates/airline_certification/pilotschools/) the student must still complete all the curriculum requirements of the course in order to be issued a graduation certificate. Therefore, even though an eligible student has passed the FAA written examination, assistance payments may still be afforded for that ground school instruction which is necessary to complete course requirements.

6. Education benefits will not be paid for pursuit of a flight objective for which the student is already qualified. ([38 USC 3471](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:3471%20edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4230(c)\*)](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073742/M22-4,%20Part%2010,%20Compliance%20Survey.%20Chapter%2004,%20Procedures%20Applicable%20to%20Facilities%20Offering%20Specific%20Types%20of%20Training.#*) A student who has obtained a flight certificate or rating for a course, or who could obtain that certificate or rating without further training, is already qualified.

i. Former military pilots with the equivalent of a commercial pilot certificate and instrument rating may obtain an FAA commercial pilot certificate and instrument rating without the FAA flight examination within 12 months after release from active duty flying status. Refresher training in commercial or instrument courses within 12 months after active duty flying status is not permitted.

ii. Refresher training may be provided for veterans who once held an FAA certificate and the certificate was canceled or surrendered before or during the veteran's qualifying service. In such cases, the refresher training must update the veteran's knowledge and skills in the technological advances made during and since the veteran's active military service.

An individual who held a FAA certificate before or during active duty service may have surrendered that certificate or the FAA may have canceled it. The individual may receive the equivalent of the number of months of educational assistance necessary to complete the course that will qualify him or her for the same grade certificate. 

**Institution of Higher Learning (IHL) Flight**

1.  IHLs offering flight training must maintain a record of VA student’s previous education and training, grant appropriate credit for previous education and training, shorten the student's course proportionately, and notify the student and the VA of any course changes or modifications. ([38 CFR 21.4253(d)(3)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=f338b9a5b811c8fabbbd0987339a8b21&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14253); [21.4254(c)(4)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=f338b9a5b811c8fabbbd0987339a8b21&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14254)).

2.  Under FAR, course credits may be transferred in part from one certificated school to another. (A "certificated" school is one that has its flight training courses approved under [FAR Parts 141](https://www.faa.gov/licenses_certificates/airline_certification/pilotschools/) or [142](https://www.faa.gov/pilots/training/part_142/).) According to [14 CFR § 141.67 (b)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.141&r=PART)  “A person who transfers from one [Part 141](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.141&r=PART) approved pilot school to another [Part 141](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.141&r=PART) approved pilot school may receive credit for that previous training.” The receiving school shall determine the amount of previous training to be transferred, up to fifty percent, to be transferred, based on a flight and a written test.  The results of the flight and written test will be used to validate the transfer and must be part of the permanent record maintained at the IHL.

1. A student who enrolls in a course of training may receive credit for not more than twenty percent of the curriculum requirement for knowledge and experience received from other than a [Part 141](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.141&r=PART) pilot school or [14 CFR Part 142](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.142&r=PART) approved aeronautical or flight training course.
2. A student who enrolls in a course of training may receive credit for not more than fifty percent of the curriculum requirement for knowledge and experience received from a [Part 141](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.141&r=PART) pilot school or [Part 142](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.142&r=PART) training center.
3. The amount of credit for previous training allowed, whether received from a [Part 141](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.141&r=PART) pilot school or other source, must be in the student’s enrollment record at the time of enrollment.
4. When a student transfers from a [Part 141](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.141&r=PART) pilot school or terminates training for any reason, the student must be given, upon request, a transcript of the results of the student’s participation in that course of training. This transcript must be signed by the chief instructor of the course and must consist of at least the name of the school that gave the training, including the school’s certificate number, if applicable; kind of training given; course or courses taken; a statement verifying the student was enrolled in the school’s course of training; and the results of each stage check and final check.
5. If the student is transferring into a [Part 141](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.141&r=PART) pilot school that holds examining authority, the credit that may be granted is limited to a transferring student who received his or her training from another [Part 141](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.141&r=PART) approved pilot school and training course.
6. Students seeking certifying statements for a restricted privileges Airline Transport Pilot (ATP) Certificate in accordance with [14 CFR § 61.160](https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/14/61.160) may transfer credit for aeronautical knowledge and flight training gained at an institution of higher education which holds an Institutional Authority Letter of Authorization (IALOA) to another institution holding an IALOA, in accordance with [14 CFR § 141.77](https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/14/141.77). This would apply to previous training for the instrument rating and commercial certificate, taken under a [Part 141](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.141&r=PART) pilot school at an institution of higher education that holds an IALOA.

3.  Course credits may not be transferred from an IHL [14 CFR Part 61](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=8532b9e0986c3bcbc2a2e44d58fa9008&mc=true&node=pt14.2.61&rgn=div5) flight program. [Part 61](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=8532b9e0986c3bcbc2a2e44d58fa9008&mc=true&node=pt14.2.61&rgn=div5) flight programs are not accredited according to the FAA and prior credit from this type of program cannot be assessed towards any other IHL flight program conducted under [Part 141](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.141&r=PART) or [142](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.142&r=PART).  However, the requirement of evaluation still stands even though it cannot be transferred.

**b. Review Procedures**

Vocational/NCD and IHL

1. Review the student's [VA Form 22-1990, Application for Education Benefits](https://www.vba.va.gov/pubs/forms/VBA-22-1990-ARE.pdf), and discharge certificate DD Form 214 (Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty), for any evidence of military flight training or experience. 

***Note:*** Student’s previous institutions in VA-Once, TIMS, and/or LTS to determine if a student may have prior credit that needs to be evaluated by the student’s current facility. School documentation such as the school application, FAA Airman Registry, student’s course schedule and degree evaluation can aid in determining if prior credit was evaluated properly.

2. Review all transcripts from other IHL and vocational/NCD flight programs or any other program pursued by the student. Get copies of all [VA Forms 22-1999 (Instructions and Certifications for VA Enrollment)](https://www.vba.va.gov/pubs/forms/vba-22-1999-are.pdf?_ga=2.18213945.1206357025.1555902018-524815269.1555902018) and [VA Forms 22-6553c (Monthly Certification of Flight Training)](https://www.vba.va.gov/pubs/forms/VBA-22-6553c-ARE.pdf), submitted by a flight school for each claimant in the survey sample. 

***Note:*** Review these documents for any/all credit granted for previous experience and training. During the site visit, review the school's records of previous experience and training to verify if prior training and experience (if any) was evaluated and credit granted and properly reported (for example, to each part of the course – dual, solo, and ground school where applicable).  Ensure that credit granted is properly documented and reported to the student and that the student’s training and tuition & fees charges were reduced accordingly.

**4.30 RECORDS AND REPORTS OF ENROLLMENT, CHANGES IN ENROLLMENT, AND TERMINATION OR INTERRUPTION**

---

For general requirements and procedures see Paragraph 3.04d.

**a. Requirements.**

1. The school and the student must certify the hours of flight and ground instruction received each month on VA Form 22-6553c. The certification will include the type of instruction given (dual, solo, ground school, preflight and postflight briefings), and the hours and charges for each type of instruction. Charges for dual flight instruction, solo flight training, and accompanying pre- and postflight instruction along with ground instruction are eligible for reimbursement.

2. All flight training hours (dual and solo) certified for reimbursement must be included in the FAA-approved curriculum which has been approved by the SAA. When FAR part 142 was issued, part 61 was revised to put a limit on the number of hours in a flight simulator that can be used to meet the flight requirements of part 61. Nonflight hours which are not FAA-approved may be included in an approved flight training course subject to the following limitations:

i. The total hours of preflight and postflight briefings may not exceed the total hours provided for in the training course outline or training program curriculum. If the training course outline or training program curriculum makes no provision for preflight and postflight briefings, then the total hours of pre- and postflight briefings may not exceed 25 percent of the approved flight hours in the course. For example, if an instrument rating is approved for 40 hours of flight training, preflight and postflight briefings may not exceed 10 hours (25 percent of 40 hours).

ii. Ground school instruction must be a part of the FAA-approved curriculum. Ground school is generally intended to prepare the student for the written examination.

3. Ground school may be provided on a group basis in a classroom setting or furnished through programmed audiovisual instruction. In either case the ground school instruction must be provided under the supervision of a qualified instructor who is available for consultation. A record of ground school  instruction which shows the hours or units completed must be maintained on a current basis and must be signed and dated by the ground school instructor.

4. In some cases, a student may take the FAA written examination before starting a flight course or before completing all requirements of the course. If the student has passed the FAA written examination before enrolling in or completing all requirements of the course, the student should be credited with not less than 50 percent of the required ground school instruction hours for the course. If the ground school training was taken in preparation for the test and such training was by an FAR part 141 certificated school, full credit would normally be given. However, additional ground school instruction may be provided when it is necessary to complete all curriculum requirements.

5. Except for minor substitutions, an eligible student enrolled in a flight training course may train only in the aircraft approved for that course. If a particular aircraft is not available for some compelling reason, the veteran may be permitted to train in an aircraft different from that shown for the particular course, provided the aircraft substituted will adequately meet the training requirements for that phase of the course. Substitutions should be identified by the school on the VA Forms 22-6553c showing the substituted aircraft and the reason for the substitution. If the charge for the substituted aircraft is different from the charge for the regularly approved aircraft, the reimbursement will be based on the charge for the substituted aircraft or the charge approved for the regular aircraft, whichever is the lesser.

**b. Review Procedures.**

1. During preparation for the survey, photocopy the VA Forms 22-6553c submitted during the review period for each case in the survey sample or transfer the data certified (type and hours of instruction) onto a worksheet for use during the a site visit. A list of approved aircraft for each course showing model, horsepower,  and ID number ("N" number) should be obtained from the facility approval file or requested from the school at the beginning of the a site visit.

2. For each course in the review sample, determine if the aircraft used for instruction are approved for the course and verify the hours of flight, ground school and pre- and postflight instruction as certified on the VA Forms 22-6553c.

i. Verify the flight instruction hours certified for each month through cross-check of the pilot log (if available at the school during the a site visit), flight or invoice tickets, engine log records and daily flight records. For flight simulator under FAR part 61, ensure that the number of hours does not exceed the limit.

ii. Determine if ground school instruction is being conducted in accordance with the FAA-approved curriculum. Verify the hours of ground school instruction certified through a review of the school's ground school records. Cross-check entries on this record with invoice tickets or other available records showing the hours and charges for instruction.

3. Verify the hours of pre- and postflight instruction through review of invoice tickets or other records showing the hours and charges for instruction. Review the records of students not receiving VA benefits to determine if pre- and postflight briefings are required for and provided to students not receiving VA benefits at the same rate as VA students.

4. For students in the review sample who have completed courses during the review period, verify that the FAA check ride was not certified for payment of benefits. The leasing of aircraft to take a check ride with an FAA examiner is prohibited except where a licensed pilot must be present during the flight test. Payment may be authorized for the final stage check with the flight school's chief flight instructor if it is included in the training curse outline or training program curriculum.

5. If aircraft have been substituted, ensure that the substituted aircraft meet the minimum training requirements for the course and that the charge for the substituted aircraft is not more than the charge for the approved aircraft.

**4.31 RECORDS AND REPORTS OF PROGRESS, CONDUCT, OR ATTENDANCE**

---

For general requirements and procedures see Paragraph 3.04e.

**a. Requirements.**

1. A flight school is required by FAR to maintain adequate records to show the progress and grades of students in each FAA-approved flight training course. [38 CFR 21.4263(v)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=e48a7b785516c7358878fbd9eb0f3ea2&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14263) also requires that the school maintain an adequate system of records to show the progress of each veteran, service member or reservist. A FAA-approved flight training curriculum will include a description of the tests and checks used to measure a student's progress for each stage of training as well as the stage of training normally accomplished within each training period of 90 days. Progress records must be adequate to show a student's level of proficiency at various stages and may include written instruction appraisals, graded course work, copies of periodic written examinations, or other documents that will permit an evaluation of the student's progress toward satisfactory completion of the flight training course.

2. As with other types of training, entitlement to benefits for a program of flight training requires that the veteran, service member or reservist, having commenced the pursuit of a flight training program, continues to maintain satisfactory progress. If the eligible VA student fails to maintain satisfactory progress, educational benefits will be discontinued by VA. Progress is unsatisfactory if the veteran, service member or reservist does not satisfactorily progress according to the regularly prescribed standards and practices of the school he or she is attending.

3. The SAA may also require that students pursuing approved programs of flight training complete a minimum number of instructional hours in a month or calendar quarter, and may set a maximum number of months in which to complete the course. For example, a SAA may require a minimum of 20 hours of flight instruction (dual or solo) in one calendar quarter, and may set a maximum course completion time of 12 months.

4. A flight school, like other institutions, must have and enforce established standards of progress. The school must regularly evaluate the student's progress and compare the student's progress with clearly defined progress standards such as a minimum proficiency level for his or her stage of training, graded course work, periodic examinations or flight checks, or other techniques. In addition, the school's standards of progress may require that the student satisfactorily complete a minimum number of flight hours during a specified period of time (e.g., 20 flight hours during each calendar quarter).

5. The school's established standards of progress must also define any conditions for interruption of training due to unsatisfactory grades or progress; a description of any probationary period; and the conditions for the student's reentrance/readmission following dismissal/suspension for unsatisfactory progress.

**b. Review Procedures.**

1. Review records maintained by the school for each student to determine if they adequately reflect the student's progress in his or her program of flight training.

2. Review student progress records and determine whether FAA- and SAA-approved (or VA-approved in those states where the regional office acts as the approving authority) standards of progress have been enforced by the school, and the school has promptly reported unsatisfactory progress, where applicable.

**4.32 RESTRICTIONS ON PERCENTAGE OF VETERANS AND ELIGIBLE PERSONS ENROLLED** ([38 CFR 21.4201](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=6ad03613dc7661a9aa480b5b1e6d1064&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14201))

---

For general requirements and procedures, see [Section 4.05](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073742/M22-4,%20Part%2010,%20Compliance%20Survey.%20Chapter%2004,%20Procedures%20Applicable%20to%20Facilities%20Offering%20Specific%20Types%20of%20Training.#405).

1. **Requirements.**

Vocational/Non-College Degree (NCD) Flight

1. The 85 percent enrollment restriction (including the 35 percent **exemption to report**) applies to flight schools and courses in general but does not apply to military aero clubs.

2. In determining if the 85 percent requirement is met, the review period is the 30 days preceding a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) beneficiary’s enrollment. Compare the hours of training completed by supported students (students drawing VA benefits under Title 38 or Title 10 and students supported by the Educational and Training Institute, or ETI) in the review period to the total hours of training completed by all students during the same period. See [Part 09, Chapter 09, Subpart 9.15](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000080125/Part%209:%20Chapter%209%20-%20Miscellaneous#915) for a description of the differences between supported and non-supported students when calculating the 85 percent enrollment ratio.

If the result is more than 85 percent, the enrollment restriction is not met and further certifications will not be approved until such time as the hours of training completed by supported students is equal to, or less than, 85 percent of the total. Make two separate computations, one for all training approved under [Federal Aviation Regulation (FAR) Part 141](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.141&r=PART), and one for all training approved under other parts of the FAR. Non-supported students (students drawing federal financial aid, third-party scholarships, and paying out of pocket) must be enrolled in the same approved program in order to be used in the 85 percent computation. See [Section 4.33](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073742/M22-4,%20Part%2010,%20Compliance%20Survey.%20Chapter%2004,%20Procedures%20Applicable%20to%20Facilities%20Offering%20Specific%20Types%20of%20Training.#433) regarding review of charges for students not receiving VA benefits who are used in the 85 percent computation.

i. For students enrolled in courses under [FAR Part 141](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.141&r=PART), base the computation on the actual hours of logged instructional flight time or the charges. Non-supported students who are used in the computation must have completed the requirements for a private pilot's license and must be enrolled in [FAR Part 141](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.141&r=PART) courses at the commercial pilot level or higher.

ii. For courses approved under [FAR Part 63](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title14/14cfr63_main_02.tpl), base the computation on ground training time in addition to actual logged instructional flight time or the charges accordingly.

iii. Courses under [FAR Part 61](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=02a2bbccb1d2c706e46104cdd8196da0&node=pt14.2.61&rgn=div5) can be approved only at a flight training center operating under a grant of exemption. Treat these courses together with those approved under the grant of exemption for the computation. Base the computation upon the total of all types of training (ground, simulator, actual instructional flight, etc.) or the charges.

iv. The flight time of an owner or officer of the flight school may not be included in computing the 85 percent ratio.

     Institution of Higher Learning (IHL) Flight

The requirements for IHL facilities with flight training programs are identical to the requirements outlined in [Part 10, Chapter 04, Subchapter 4.05](https://www.knowva.ebenefits.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_ssnew/help/customer/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001018/content/554400000073742/M22-4), with the following additional considerations:

1. The 85 percent enrollment restriction (including the 35 percent exemption) applies to IHL facilities and to their flight programs under [FAR Parts 61](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?c=ecfr&sid=40760189a03dfea0b501608f33820a45&rgn=div5&view=text&node=14:2.0.1.1.2&idno=14), [63](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title14/14cfr63_main_02.tpl), [141](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=22e31b7974e4942a5fa4a94751d0cca4&mc=true&node=pt14.3.141&rgn=div5), and [142](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=5c5dfbeb62dbbde618a525c5ad81882e&mc=true&node=pt14.3.142&rgn=div5).

1. In determining the 85 percent ratio, the facility must compare supported students (students drawing VA-benefits under Title 38 or Title 10 and students supported by the Educational and Training Institute, or ETI) and non-supported students (students drawing federal financial aid, third-party scholarships, and paying out of pocket).

1. The VA will provide a format for the submittal of the 85/15 ratio to all schools which will be required for usage unless a school has received specific approval to submit in a different format.  Regardless of the method, the information that is required to be sent to the VA must be present.

1. The State Approving Agency (SAA) may approve various flight training “tracks” pertaining to specific degree majors or concentrations.  The 85 percent ratio must be calculated separately for each track or concentration.

1. Deviations from the SAA approved content or length of a program, as well as any differences from the approved cost and/or equipment used, may also require a facility to seek approval for such “new” programs, and would require separate 85 percent ratio calculations.

 b. **Review Procedures.** 

Vocational/NCD Flight

1. For the most recent VA student's enrollment or reenrollment at the school, regardless of whether he or she is in the review sample, list the verified beginning date for date of enrollment (see [Paragraph 4.27(b)(2)](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073742/M22-4,%20Part%2010,%20Compliance%20Survey.%20Chapter%2004,%20Procedures%20Applicable%20to%20Facilities%20Offering%20Specific%20Types%20of%20Training.#427b2)). If the school has a history of exceeding the 85 percent enrollment limitation, also check each VA student in the survey sample who has enrolled or reenrolled in a flight course after the date of the last survey.

2. From the daily flight record for the 30 days preceding each enrollment, list all supported students and non-supported students who completed training under the same part of the FAR (e.g., [Part 61](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=8532b9e0986c3bcbc2a2e44d58fa9008&mc=true&node=pt14.2.61&rgn=div5), [Part 141](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.141&r=PART)). Verify and compute the ratio of hours of training completed by supported students to the total of hours of training completed by all students.

i. Cross-check the entries on the daily flight record through review of pilot logs and invoice tickets to verify that all supported students' flight time is listed on the daily record. Also verify that the flight time of non-supported students was instructional in nature. In computing the ratio, exclude flight time for business or pleasure purposes by non-supported students.

ii. Review the training records of non-supported students to verify that they are enrolled in the same approved program under the same part of the FAR as the supported students. Exclude flight time for private pilot training, or for [FAR Part 61](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=8532b9e0986c3bcbc2a2e44d58fa9008&mc=true&node=pt14.2.61&rgn=div5) training unless offered at a flight training center operating under a grant of exemption.

iii. Cross-check the charges for non-supported students through review of invoice tickets and school financial records to ensure that flight charges are not waived or rebated, completely or in part, by the school.  If the training is given at a reduced charge to students not receiving VA benefits, include that time in the supported student part of the computation. (See [Section 4.33](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073742/M22-4,%20Part%2010,%20Compliance%20Survey.%20Chapter%2004,%20Procedures%20Applicable%20to%20Facilities%20Offering%20Specific%20Types%20of%20Training.#433) regarding review of charges.)

3. For flight engineer, flight navigator and similar courses, verify the separate computation for the most recent VA student's enrollment through review of training records and school financial records. Ensure that non-supported students and supported students used in the separate computation for these courses are enrolled on the same basis and pay the same charges as VA students in flight courses.

4. Exclude all flight time of owners or officers of the school in computing the ratio.

5. If the 85 percent enrollment limitation is not met for the latest VA student's enrollment and this was the only enrollment to be verified because the school had a good 85 percent compliance history, expand the area of review. Make an 85 percent computation for all VA students in the survey sample, in order to determine if the violation is isolated or involves other cases.

6. If VA has granted the school a 35 percent exemption to report, indicating that not more than 35 percent of its students are VA students, review the 30-day period preceding the date of the last VA student's enrollment and verify the certification. The review should be based on the most recent VA student's enrollment, regardless of whether the case is contained in the review sample.

     **IHL Flight (Update May 11, 2020)**

The review procedures for IHL facilities with flight training programs are identical to the review procedures outlined in [Part 10, Chapter 04, Subchapter 4.05](https://www.knowva.ebenefits.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_ssnew/help/customer/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001018/content/554400000073742/M22-4), with the following additional considerations:

1. 85/15 computations must be reviewed for every term within the survey period. If modular terms not listed in the catalog are used for flight courses, then 85/15 calculations must be performed for each enrollment period. 

2. For contracted courses, the IHL is responsible for the reporting of 85/15 and must insure the contracted vocational/NCD or IHL facility is not using the contractor’s students within their reportable 85/15 calculations.

3. Methods by which IHL students pay on account vary. Review all methods to determine if veteran students are eligible to use each of the differing methods or not.

**Note:** Variations in types of payments that students can use will affect 85/15 computations.

4. All communications sent to instructors, advisors, or any other faculty members that are seen to have any relations to the registration for paying and/or waiver of costs pertaining to flight courses must be made available to the reviewer upon request.

**4.33 CHARGES FOR TUITION AND FEES** ([38 USC 3690](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3690 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4202(a)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=228c1ae5de11581a3b5cb92efec88682&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14202))

---

For general requirements and procedures, see [Section 4.06](#406).

**a. Requirements.**

1. The flight charges certified for reimbursement on the VA Form 22-6553c must be in accordance with the rates approved by the SAA, or by VA in those states where the regional office acts as the SAA. Payment is based on reimbursement of 60 percent of the approved charges for flight training pursued by eligible beneficiaries. Reimbursement is restricted to the charges for solo and dual flight instruction, ground school instruction, and pre- and postflight instruction associated with solo and dual flight training hours.

2. Eligible VA students must pay 40 percent of the approved charges for the training received.

3. The flight training courses listed below contain required solo flight training time. Other flight training courses may also include solo flight training if it is included in the training course outline or training program curriculum.

i. Commercial Pilot Certificate

ii. Commercial Pilot (Helicopter)

iii. Commercial Pilot (Gliders)

iv. Commercial Pilot (Free Balloon)

v. Flight Instructor (limited to "pilot-in-command" time)

vi. Commercial Test Pilot

4. Students not receiving VA benefits who are used in the 85 percent enrollment computation must pay 100 percent of the approved charges for instruction. The course may not be offered at reduced rates to such students not receiving VA benefits unless it is also offered to VA students at the same reduced rates and on the same basis, e.g., discounted rates for payment in advance. Employee discounts must be provided  on an equal basis to VA students and students not receiving VA benefits.

5. Flight training charges may not include charges for books or supplies or charges for any non-instructional services or amenities which may be provided by the flight school. Non-instructional services or amenities may include enrollment incentives such as transportation and lodging for out-of-town students and "free" preliminary or follow-up training.

6. One or more students may own an aircraft. In such cases, the aircraft may be leased back to the school for instruction of the student-owner or the instruction of other students. The student-owned aircraft and the charges for its use must be approved by the SAA for each flight course in which it is used. The lease agreement may not result in any increased cost to the VA or have the effect of higher rates to VA student-owners than to other students.

7. Flight clubs may exist at some flight schools where members may rent aircraft at reduced rates. If the reduced rates are less than the approved charges for the aircraft, the lesser rate must be certified for reimbursement. Flight club membership fees may not be certified for reimbursement.

**b. Review Procedures.**

1. The charges certified for reimbursement must be verified through review of school financial records including invoice tickets signed by the student and a school official and entries posted in the accounts receivable ledger. Payment of the cost of the course by VA students must also be verified by review of school financial records. Charges for students not receiving VA benefits used in the 85 percent enrollment computation must be reviewed to verify that they pay the full approved charge for the course. Review of school advertising materials and interviews with school officials should be used to determine if any discount plans are available to students and if these plans are offered on an equal basis to both VA students and students not receiving VA benefits.

2. If the flight school offers any non-instructional services or amenities at no or minimal cost to the student, school financial records for students who take advantage of these services must be compared with records for students who do not receive the services. Differences in the total cost of training for the students in each group must be determined to evaluate if the students who do not take advantage of the "free" services consistently complete courses at a lower cost than other students.

3. Interviews with school officials should identify any students buying an aircraft from the school and those having a leaseback agreement with the school. Determine if the aircraft and charges have been approved by the SAA. Compare the charges for VA students who have leaseback arrangements and students not receiving VA benefits who have leaseback arrangements to determine if the charges for the same or similar aircraft are equivalent.

4. Determine if any VA students in the survey sample are members of a flight club. Verify through a review of school financial records that the charges for such students are based on the actual cost to the student and membership fees were not certified for reimbursement.

**4.34 ADDITIONAL AREAS OF REVIEW FOR COURSES APPROVED AS NONACCREDITED** ([38 USC 3676](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3676 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4254](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=467fa60aa952fdd458dd338baf600383&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14254))

---

For general requirements and procedures, see [Section 4.07](#407).

**a. Requirements.**

1. Students must be furnished a catalog or bulletin containing the approved course outline and the approved charges.

2. Enrollments must be within the limitations approved by the SAA. An enrollment limitation must be established for the ground school portion of flight school courses. The SAA may, at its discretion, set an enrollment limitation for the flight portion of the course.

3. If the school has a payment plan whereby students may purchase blocks of instructional or rental time in advance at a discount, pro rata refunds must be provided if the student discontinues the course.

**b. Review Procedures.**

1. Confirm receipt of catalogs through a review of school recruitment and registration procedures.

2. If ground school sessions are conducted during the site visit, determine by class check if the number of students attending is within the limitations established by the SAA. If additional limitations have been established for the flight portions of a course determine the total number of students enrolled in the course and whether this number is within the enrollment limitation. If student-teacher ratios have been established, compare the number of certified flight instructors to the number of students enrolled in each course.

3. If a veteran student has paid in advance for training and discontinued the course before completion, review financial records to ensure that a pro rata refund was provided within 40 days

**4.35 POSSESSION OF VALID PRIVATE PILOT CERTIFICATE OR HIGHER RATING AND APPROPRIATE MEDICAL CERTIFICATE** ([10 USC 16136(c)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:16136 edition:prelim)); [38 USC 3034(d)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3034 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4263(a)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=467fa60aa952fdd458dd338baf600383&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14263))

---

**a. Requirements.** The requirements for compliance with VA law and regulations in these areas differ considerably from those imposed by the FAA. Flight school officials may need to be reminded of the differences.

1. A veteran, service member, or reservist who has basic eligibility to receive educational assistance allowance under the provisions of chapters 30, 32, or 1606, may receive educational assistance for flight training provided that the student also possesses an unlimited private pilot certificate issued pursuant to FAR part 61, subpart E, or higher certificate or rating before enrolling in the flight training course. Benefits are not payable if the individual possesses only a student pilot or recreational pilot certificate before entry into the approved flight training course. Recreational certificates do not meet the private pilot certificate requirement. For service members on flight status, a commercial pilot certificate (fixed wing or rotor craft) will satisfy this requirement. In order to show that the student meets this requirement, the school must maintain in its records a photocopy of the student's private pilot certificate or higher rating or certificate.

2. The student must also meet the medical requirements for the flight course being pursued. The medical requirements for the course must be met at the time of initial enrollment and continuously during pursuit of the flight training course. For all flight training courses except the ATP certificate, the student must possess a valid 2nd class medical certificate. For the ATP course, the student must possess a valid 1st class medical certificate.

3. A 1st class medical certificate is valid until the last day of the sixth month after the month of medical examination. The certificate then reverts to a 2nd class medical certificate, which is only valid for six additional months, because the expiration date is determined as stated in subparagraph (4) below.

4. A 2nd class medical certificate is valid until the last day of the 12th month after the month of medical examination.  The certificate then reverts to a 3rd class medical certificate.

EXAMPLES:

A 1st class medical certificate based upon a medical examination conducted on January 15, 1996, expires for ATP training on July 31, 1996. The certificate reverts to a 2nd class medical certificate, acceptable for all other flight training. The 2nd class medical certificate expires on January 31, 1997. The certificate reverts to a 3rd class medical certificate, valid only for private pilot operations, and not acceptable for flight training.

A 2nd class medical certificate based upon a medical examination conducted on January 15, 1996, expires on January 31, 1997. The certificate reverts to a 3rd class medical certificate, valid only for private pilot operations, and not acceptable for flight training.

**b. Review Procedures.**

1. Review school enrollment records for each VA student in the survey sample and for all VA students currently enrolled in the school to verify that the students possessed a valid private pilot certificate or higher rating/certificate before enrollment in the flight training courses. For each student in the survey sample, note on the compliance survey worksheet the date that the private pilot certificate or higher rating/certificate was issued. For all other VA students currently enrolled, record this information in the survey work papers.

2. Review school enrollment documents for each VA student in the survey sample to verify that the student possessed a valid medical certificate of the appropriate class before enrollment in the flight training courses and that the medical certificate was maintained during the entire period of pursuit of the course. For each student in the survey sample, note on the compliance survey worksheet the effective date of the medical certificate and the effective date of renewals of the certificate. For all other VA students currently enrolled in the school, record this information in the survey work papers.

**SUBCHAPTER 04. AREAS OF REVIEW FOR TRAINING ESTABLISHMENTS**

**4.36 VERIFICATION OF ENROLLMENT DATA**

---

For general requirements and procedures see Paragraph 3.04a.

**a. Requirements.** For on-job and apprenticeship training, the beginning date to be certified is the first date of employment in the training position. The ending date of training must be certified in accordance with the credit granted for prior training. The beginning and ending dates of training and the credit allowed as reported on the enrollment certification must agree with the information shown on the on-job or apprenticeship training agreement.

**b. Review Procedures.** Review employer records including timecards, progress or other records as necessary to verify that the beginning date certified was the actual first date of training. If the beginning date certified was not the first date of training, record the correct date on the compliance survey worksheet. Also record the hours worked commencing with the verified first date of training.  Confirm first date of employment and first date of training during trainee interviews.

**4.37 CREDIT FOR PREVIOUS EDUCATION AND TRAINING**

---

For general requirements and procedures see Paragraph 3.04c.

**a. Requirements.**

1. For training establishments, apprenticeship standards require the granting of advanced standing or credit for previously acquired experience, training or skills with commensurate wages for any progression step granted ([38 USC 3687(a)(1)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3687 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4261(c)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5d9b9b3954e02576f727bbc03fcfee73&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14261); [29 CFR 29.5](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5d9b9b3954e02576f727bbc03fcfee73&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se29.1.29_15)).

2. The veteran or eligible person may not be already qualified by reason of training and experience for the job ([38 USC 3471](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3471 edition:prelim)) and [3677(c)(7)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3677 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4230(c)\*\*](#**) and [21.4262(c)(8)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5d9b9b3954e02576f727bbc03fcfee73&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14262)).

**b. Review Procedures.**

1. During review of claims and DEA folders in preparation for the survey, review the trainee's application for benefits and, if a veteran, the discharge certificate, to determine if the trainee has had previous education, training or experience in the job objective being pursued. Review the enrollment certification and training agreement to determine if any credit was granted for previous experience or training. Note the amount of credit granted on the compliance survey worksheet. If a substantial amount of training or experience is shown on the application or discharge certificate, determine if proper development was undertaken to ensure that the trainee was not already qualified for the objective.

2. During the site visit, review the trainee's application for employment or similar records as appropriate to determine if he or she reported relevant training or experience when seeking employment. Confirm the trainee's past experience and training during the interview with the trainee.

**4.38 RECORDS AND REPORTS OF ENROLLMENT, CHANGES IN ENROLLMENT, AND TERMINATION OR INTERRUPTION** ([38 USC 3680(c)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3680 edition:prelim)) and [3687(b)(3)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3687 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.3131(a)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=99b4c4632a5bf6f941cf9f05a9e60ffd&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_13131), [21.3132(c)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=e3f7c83104a1673920600e45e269a465&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_13132), [21.4203(f)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=e3f7c83104a1673920600e45e269a465&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14203), [21.5138(a) and (b)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=e3f7c83104a1673920600e45e269a465&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15138), [21.5270](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=e3f7c83104a1673920600e45e269a465&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15270), [21.5138(a)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=e3f7c83104a1673920600e45e269a465&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15138), [21.7139(j)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=e3f7c83104a1673920600e45e269a465&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17139), [21.7170](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=e3f7c83104a1673920600e45e269a465&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17170), [21.7636(a)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=e3f7c83104a1673920600e45e269a465&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17636) and [21.7639(f)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=e3f7c83104a1673920600e45e269a465&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17639))

---

For general requirements and procedures see Paragraph 3.04d.

**a. Requirements.**

1. The trainee and the employer must certify the hours worked each month on VA Form 22-6553d, Monthly Certification of On-the-Job and Apprenticeship Training. Full payment is based on 120 hours in 1 full month. In months in which less than 120 hours are worked, benefits are proportionately reduced. Since the computation is rounded to the nearest eight hours, 116 hours is the minimum required for full benefits, as shown in [Figure 4.4](#F44) below. On the survey worksheets produced for trainees whose awards are processed by PC programs (see Paragraph 2.04(b)), the actual hours certified by the employer and trainee are shown. On VA Forms 22-1936, hours certified by the employer and trainee are shown as "Units of Payment (APP/OJT)." Each unit represents 1/15 of the monthly rate. The number of units shown is the number for which payment was made based upon the hours certified. For example, if 112 hours were certified for a month, VA Form 22-1936 will show 14 units of payment for that month.

2. The hours certified may include related training during working hours but may not include related training received or pursued after working hours. The hours certified may not include leave or vacation time or hours not worked due to strikes or layoffs.

| Hours Worked | Units | Hours Worked | Units | Hours Worked | Units | Hours Worked | Units |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 0-3 | 00 | 28-35 | 04 | 60-67 | 08 | 92-99 | 12 |
| 4-11 | 01 | 36-43 | 05 | 68-75 | 09 | 100-107 | 13 |
| 12-19 | 02 | 44-51 | 06 | 76-83 | 10 | 108-115 | 14 |
| 20-27 | 03 | 52-59 | 07 | 84-91 | 11 | 116 and above | 15 |

**Figure 4.4. Relationship of Hours Worked to Payment Units for Apprenticeship and On-the-Job Training**

**b. Review Procedures.**

1. Verify the hours certified for each month of the review period through review of official payroll or time and leave records. Ensure that the hours certified represent only actual hours on the job and do not include vacations, leave for medical purposes, strikes, layoff time, related training after working hours, etc.

2. During interviews with trainees, confirm that leave periods and hours of related training, if required, have been properly reported.

**4.39 WAGES PAID** ([38 USC 3677(b)(1)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3677 edition:prelim)), [3687(a)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3687 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4261(c)(1)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5cccd56c6efaccd84d0c200e6cd98d73&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14261) and [21.4262(b)(6)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=77a12090fe5fced98f82cd2c87b8eaa1&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14262))

---

**a. Requirements.**

1. For OJT programs, the beginning wage must be at least 50 percent of the journeyman wage. The wages must be increased in regular periodic increments until, not later than the last full month of the training period, they will be 85 percent of the journeyman wage. Wages for on-the-job programs must be fixed and certain. Wages for a journeyman or for a trainee may not be based in whole or in part on commissions, fees or other variables.

2. For apprenticeship programs, the wage scale must meet the requirements of the apprenticeship standards ([29 CFR 29.5](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=b39483376eabbdc04fb1b835b71d919b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se29.1.29_15)). There must be a progressively increasing schedule of wages to be paid the apprentice consistent with the skill acquired. The entry wage may not be less than the minimum wage under the Fair Labor Standards Act. If a higher wage is required under other Federal or State law or regulations, or by a collective bargaining agreement, the entry wage may not be less than that higher wage. Payment of commissions is not precluded for apprenticeship programs.

3. (See RPO Letter 22-06-12) The approved wage scale is shown on the training or apprenticeship agreement furnished to the trainee. Changes in the wage rate are to be reported on VA Form 22-6553d. Attainment of the journeyman rate indicates the trainee has acquired the skills of a fully trained employee and benefits must be discontinued even though the approved length of the program may not have been completed. However, cost-of-living or other wage increases which affect VA and non-VA trainees alike may be considered revisions to the wage scale and may be approved if the applicable requirements of the law and regulations are met.

**b. Review Procedures.**

1. Review the establishment's official payroll records to verify the wages which have been paid during the training program. If differences exist between the approved wage scale and the wages which have been paid, record the amounts paid and the effective dates of change. If the trainee has reached the journeyman wage, note the effective date that the increase was granted.

2. When the wages paid do not agree with the approved wage scale, determine the cause through interviews with establishment officials.

3. During trainee interviews, confirm with the trainee the amounts actually paid and the dates of increases.

**4.40 RECORDS AND REPORTS OF PROGRESS, CONDUCT AND ATTENDANCE** ([38 USC 3474](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3474 edition:prelim)), [3524](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3524 edition:prelim)) and [3677](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3677 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4135(g)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=886bc4b563c54463bb9c9732d44516f4&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14135), [21.4261(c)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=886bc4b563c54463bb9c9732d44516f4&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14261), [21.4262(c)(7)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=886bc4b563c54463bb9c9732d44516f4&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14262), and [21.4277](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=886bc4b563c54463bb9c9732d44516f4&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14277))

---

For general requirements and procedures see Paragraph 3.04e.

**a. Requirements.**

1. Adequate records must be kept by the training establishment to show the progress made by the trainee toward the job objective. The progress record should show the approximate amount of time spent in each of the job operations or tasks to be learned as part of the overall training program.

2. A trainee who fails, for reasons such as layoff or illness, to complete the total number of hours of approved training within the period originally certified may have the award period adjusted to permit payment for the additional approved hours. There is no provision for an extension of the approved length of the program.

**b. Review Procedures.**

1. Review the progress record to determine if it is maintained on a current basis. If a substantial part of the training program has been completed, note any work processes in which no training hours are shown. If there are areas in which no training has been provided, determine the reasons during interviews with establishment officials.

2. If excessive hours have been provided in one or more work processes with no or minimal training provided in other work processes, determine through interviews with establishment officials when progress ceased to be satisfactory.

3. If the benefit award period has expired, determine if the trainee completed the total number of approved hours within the award period. If not, determine the additional number of hours needed to complete the program and whether the journeyman wage was paid upon expiration of the award period.

**4.41 RELATED TRAINING** ([38 USC 3677(c)(4)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3677 edition:prelim)) and [3687(a)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3687 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR  21.4261(b)(4)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=886bc4b563c54463bb9c9732d44516f4&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14261) and [21.4262(c)(5)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=886bc4b563c54463bb9c9732d44516f4&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14262))

---

**a. Requirements.**

1. For apprenticeship programs, supplemental related instruction is required. A minimum of 144 hours of such instruction for each year of apprenticeship is recommended ([29 CFR 29.5](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=886bc4b563c54463bb9c9732d44516f4&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se29.1.29_15)). Such instruction may be given in trade, industrial or correspondence courses or other forms of approved self-study. The establishment must periodically review and evaluate the trainee's progress in related instruction.

2. For on-job programs, related instruction may be required as part of the training program for the veteran or eligible person who may need it.

**b. Review Procedures.** If related instruction is required, verify through interviews with establishment officials and with trainees that such instruction is being provided and that progress is being evaluated. Review any available records of related training maintained by the establishment or trainee. Ensure that related instruction furnished or received after working hours was not certified as hours worked (see [Paragraph 4.38(b)](#438b)).

**4.42 TRAINING AGREEMENT** ([38 USC 3677(c)(8)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3677 edition:prelim)) and [3687(a)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3687 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4261(c)(2)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=886bc4b563c54463bb9c9732d44516f4&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14261) and [21.4262(c)(10)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=886bc4b563c54463bb9c9732d44516f4&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14262))

---

**a. Requirements.**

1. The training establishment must provide a signed copy of the training or apprenticeship agreement to the Veteran or eligible person.  An on-the-job training agreement must include the training program (schedule of work processes in which training will be provided and approximate amount of time to be spent in each process) and the approved wage scale. For apprenticeship programs, the apprenticeship agreement must include either explicitly or by reference the training program, approved wage scale and information regarding the number of hours to be spent in related instruction.

2. The on-the-job training agreement may also include the amount of credit allowed for previous education or training, if any, and the beginning and ending dates of training. The information shown on the training agreement should agree with the information certified on the VA Form 22-1999.

3. Effective 8/18/2020: Regional Processing Offices no longer require a copy of  the Training Agreement (i.e., the VA Form 22-8864, Training Agreement for Apprenticeship and Other On-the-Job Training Programs, or the Department of Labor (DOL) Form ETA-671, Program Registration and Apprenticeship Agreement.) as part of the beneficiary’s folder. Facilities must still maintain the signed training agreement for each trainee and provide them for review when requested by staff assigned to complete compliance surveys for the VA.

**b. Review Procedures.** During the trainee interview, verify that the trainee did receive a signed copy of the training or apprenticeship agreement; that the training provided agrees with the approved training program; and that the wages paid are in accordance with the approved wage scale.

**4.43 FAMILY RELATIONSHIP**

---

Although no prohibition exists against family relationships present between trainer and trainee, such relationships often occur in on-job training programs and must be evaluated carefully. Care should be taken to ensure that a bona fide training program exists and especially to ensure that the trainee is not already qualified for the position because of previous experience or training ([38 USC 3677(c)(7)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3677 edition:prelim))).