# Part 1: Chapter 7 - School Liability

**Part 1: Chapter 7 - School Liability**

**Last Updated:** November 28, 2023

**[Subchapter I.](#SI) Basic Procedure**  
[7.01 General](#701)  
[7.02 Background](#702)  
[7.03 Overview of School Liability Procedures](#703)  
[7.04 Identification of Potential Liability Cases](#704)  
[7.05 Determination of Potential Liability](#705)  
[7.06 Notice to School and VA Response](#706)  
[7.07 Committee on School Liability](#707)  
[7.08 Role of Regional Counsel](#708)  
[7.09 Prehearing Conference](#709)  
[7.10 Hearing](#710)  
[7.11 Committee Panel Decision and Notice to School](#711)  
[7.12 Appellate Procedures](#712)  
  
**[Subchapter II.](#SII) Extent of Potential School Liability for Individual Overpayments**  
[7.13 General](#713)  
[7.14 False Certification Cases](#714)  
[7.15 Late Report Cases](#715)  
[7.16 Examples](#716)  
[7.17 Failure to Report and False Certification Distinguished](#717)  
[7.18 Nonpunitive Grades Assigned](#718)  
  
**[Subchapter III.](#SIII) Guidelines for School Liability Decisions**  
[7.19 General](#719)  
[7.20 Discussion of Key Concepts](#720)  
[7.21 Guidelines When Negligence is the Issue](#721)  
[7.22 Rule of Reasonable Certainty](#722)  
  
**[Subchapter IV.](#SIV) Standard Operating Procedures for School Liability Decisions**  
[7.23 Identification Phase](#723)  
[7.24 Determination of Potential School Liability](#724)  
[7.25 RPO Claims Processing when Potential School Liability has been Determined](#725)  
[7.26 Notice to School and VA Response](#726)  
[7.27 Committee On School Liability](#727)  
[7.28 Basic Steps once VA Form Letter 4-334 has been Submitted](#728)  
  
**Figures**  
[7.01 VA Form Letter 4-334](#f701)  
[7.02 Sample Pattern Letter Advising School of Certification of Appeal](#f702)

[Appendix A: School Liability Procedures for Support Services Division at Regional Processing Offices](#a1)

**SUBCHAPTER I.  BASIC PROCEDURE**

**7.01 GENERAL**

---

 This chapter provides procedures for implementing the school liability provisions of Title 38. ([38 United States Code (USC) 3685)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3685 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3685)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) The procedures for the Support Services Division (SSD) are in a separate manual. In this chapter, the terms "Education Officer (EO)," "Chief Education Liaison Officer (CELO)," "Regional Counsel (RC)," and "Support Services Division (SSD) Chief," also refers to the designees of such officials unless otherwise indicated. The term "school" means an "educational institution" as defined in [38 USC 3452(c)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3452 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3452)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) or a "training establishment" as defined in [38 USC 3452(e)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3452 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3452)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true).

**7.02 BACKGROUND**

---

a. Schools are required to report without delay, the enrollment, interruption, and termination of attendance for each person enrolled in all education programs under Title 38 and Title 10. It does not apply to the Section 901 program.

b.  VA may hold a school liable for a debt based on an overpayment to a claimant (housing/books/supplies) if the overpayment was made as a result of (1) willful or negligent failure of the school to report excessive absences from a course, or discontinuance or interruption; or (2) willful or negligent false certification. This applies to all education programs under Title 38 and Title 10. It does not apply to the Section 901 program.  VA may only hold a school liable for overpayment to a claimant (housing/books/supplies) after finding the school potentially liable under section 7.05(c), providing appropriate notice under section 7.06(b), and, if the school disagrees with the finding, providing the School Liability Process under section 7.06(c).

c.  VA may only hold a school liable for debts based on tuition and fee payments made directly to the school that were created prior to January 5, 2021, (date of enactment of PL 116-315) after finding the school potentially liable under section 7.05(c), providing appropriate notice under section 7.06(b), and, if the school disagrees with the finding, providing the School Liability Process under section 7.06(c).

d. On the other hand, VA will hold a school liable for debts based on tuition and fee payments made directly to the school that were created on or after January 5, 2021, (date of enactment of PL 116-315) without finding the school potentially liable or providing the School Liability Process.

e. After a school’s liability for an overpayment has been established (as described in either paragraph (b), (c) or (d) above), the overpayment will be recovered by the Chief of Finance at the Buffalo Regional Processing Office (RPO). The initial Notice of Indebtedness (NOI) letter, signed by the RPO Director, directs the school to submit payment via check or money order payable to the Department of Veterans Affairs and sent to the Buffalo RPO address.  However, any amount collected from a school shall be reimbursed if the overpayment is subsequently recovered from the claimant ([**38 USC 3685**](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:3685%20edition:prelim)%20OR%20(granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3685)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true)). VA may not withhold the annual school reporting fee unless liability is not contested or liability has been upheld by a final decree of a court of appropriate jurisdiction ([**38 USC 3684**](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:3684%20edition:prelim)%20OR%20(granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3684)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true)).

**7.03 OVERVIEW OF SCHOOL LIABILITY PROCEDURES**

---

**a**. The school liability procedures may be summarized as follows:

1. Identification Phase. VA relies primarily on compliance surveys to identify potential school liability cases although other sources may be used. (See [par. 7.04](#704))

2. Determination of Potential Liability. Upon the request of the CELO, the EO will review compliance survey reports together with other information available about the school to determine if a school may be found potentially liable for overpayments usually assigned to students. (See [par. 7.05](#705))

3. Notice to School and VA Response. The SSD Chief will compute the potential liability and prepare the letter to notify the school of the amount and of its rights under the school liability procedures. (See [par. 7.06](#706))

4. Committee on School Liability. A panel of three from the RPO’s Committee on School Liability will decide the case. The school may challenge the qualifications of proposed panel members. (See [par. 7.07](#707))

5. Role of Regional Counsel. The Regional Counsel will present VA's case at the hearing and will be present at any prehearing conference. (See [par. 7.08](#708))

6. Prehearing Conference. If a hearing is requested, a prehearing conference will be held unless specifically waived by the school. (See [par. 7.09](#709))

7. Hearing. All hearings will be held under published hearing rules. (See [par. 7.10](#710))

8. Committee Panel Decision and Notice to School. The Committee Panel will make its decision based on the evidence of record including the hearing transcript if a hearing was held. Entire claimant folders will not normally be reviewed. (See [par. 7.11](#711))

9. Appellate Procedures. A school may appeal an adverse decision to the School Liability Appeals Board in Washington. (See [par. 7.12](#712))

**7.04 IDENTIFICATION OF POTENTIAL SCHOOL LIABILITY CASES**

---

Compliance surveys ordinarily provide the basis for pursuing school liability.

For debts, including amounts based on tuition and fee payments made directly to the school that were created prior to January 5, 2021, but excluding amounts based on tuition and fee payments made directly to the school that were created on or after January 5, 2021, if the CELO believes a compliance survey shows school reporting errors which could ultimately result in a finding of school liability, the CELO will refer the survey report, including the findings on individual cases, to the EO with a request for a determination of potential liability. Referrals to the EO for potential school liability should be accompanied by a 100 percent survey. Exceptions exist and communication among the EO and CELO are vital. Refer to procedures regarding compliance survey requirements in Part 9, Chapter 9.

However, for debts based on tuition and fee payments made directly to the school that were created on or after January 5, 2021, the CELO will not refer such amounts for consideration under school liability because, in accordance with 38 U.S.C. § 3685(b)(2), such debts do not require a finding of school potentially liable prior to being levied on the school; rather VA will recover those debts by processing through the Debt Management Center (DMC) without going through the school liability process.

**7.05 DETERMINATION OF POTENTIAL LIABILITY**

---

 According to Code of Federal Regulations [(CFR) 21.4009](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14009), only the EO is authorized to make a finding of potential school liability.

**a. Reporting Problem.** Whenever the CELO requests a determination as to potential school liability, or other evidence indicates a school may have a significant reporting problem, the EO must consider the issue of potential school liability. The EO will consider all known facts about the school which might have a bearing on school liability. If circumstances warrant, the EO may request an additional liaison visit or a field investigation to obtain additional information. Separate procedures apply if there is likelihood of fraud. (Refer to Part 10, Chapter 6.)

**b. No Liability.** The EO must document the reasons for not holding a school potentially liable when the CELO has requested a determination as to potential liability or when a significant reporting problem appears to exist. If potential liability is not assessed, the EO will advise the CELO of the reasons for not assessing potential school liability. The CELO will advise the school of any reporting problems not previously discussed with the school during the compliance survey exit interview.

**c. Liability Assessed**

1. If the EO determines the evidence warrants a finding of potential school liability, he or she will prepare a memorandum of such determination. The EO may consult with the Office of Inspector General (OIG) for clarification of willful false certification. If no evidence of willful or false certification, referral is not required. (If there is doubt as to the cost effectiveness of pursuing school liability, the EO may consult with the SSD Chief on this matter. However, the final determination of potential liability shall be made by the EO)

2. Authority to sign this memorandum may not be delegated. Any supporting documents (e.g., compliance survey reports, error analysis) will be attached to the memorandum, as will VA Form 22-8804, Report of Potential School Liability, completed for each case in which the EO believes there is potential school liability. The memorandum and attachments will then be forwarded to the SSD Chief.

**NOTE:** The SSD Chief will be advised if fraud is indicated. He/she will take no further action pending a determination by RC and/ or the Office of Inspector General (OIG), if applicable.

**d. Preparation of VA Form 22-8804**

1. General. A VCE must complete a VA Form 22-8804 in each case of potential liability. The form provides the Support Services Division with sufficient information to compute the amount of potential school liability. (Do not use this form for cases involving correspondence or flight training; instead, refer the required data to SSD by memorandum.) VCEs should use VA Form 22-8804 for all benefits under Title 38 or Title 10 except Section 901.

2. Need for Accuracy. It is essential each VA Form 22-8804 be completed accurately. It is anticipated all forms for a particular school will be completed on a "project" basis and only by VCEs who have had special training in school liability procedures, especially in procedures found in this chapter.

3. Procedures. The key issue in completing the form is the period of potential school liability (item 5F). This period will often be shorter than the period covered by the total overpayment. Complete separate lines on the form if there is more than one period of liability, or if there are rate changes within a given period of liability. Instructions for specific items may be found on the reverse side of the form. General instructions are shown here:

i. The VCE must prepare VA Form 22-8804 with the TIMS folder. If the folder is located at another Regional Processing Office (RPO), the VCE should coordinate with the other RPO to have temporary access into the RPO’s TIMS. Folder transfer for potential school liability is not encouraged to ensure RPOs maintain their jurisdiction over their folders. The VCE should do analysis, complete VA Form 22-8804 but return to their RPO of jurisdiction as quickly as possible.

ii. VA Form 22-8804 should not be completed in cases in which the overpayment for the liability period has already been *recovered*.

iii. The original VA Form 22-8804 will be forwarded to SSD.

iv. A copy will be captured in the claimant’s TIMS folder as CORRA. The VCE should place in Remarks, VA Form 22-8804.

v. Once a school has been notified of its potential liability, no additional VA Forms 22-8804 may be referred for that school unless they are treated as a separate group of errors, in which case, the notice procedure of potential liability will be applied a second time.

**7.06  NOTICE TO SCHOOL AND VA RESPONSE**

---

**b. VA Form Letter 4-334 - Notice of Intent to Hold Institution Liable For Educational Assistance Overpayments.** When the review of all records is complete, and no fraud is indicated, the SSD Chief will prepare VA Form Letter 4-334 (see [fig. 7.01](https://www.knowva.ebenefits.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_ssnew/help/customer/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001018/content/554400000071640/Part%201:%20Chapter%207%20-%20School%20Liability#f701)) for the RPO Director’s signature. This signed letter and all attachments should be sent to the school by certified mail. The letter will notify the school of VA's intention to hold the school liable and of the opportunity for a hearing before a School Liability Panel and for a pre-hearing conference. The attachments, VA Form 4-5237, Listing of Students Overpaid as Result of Institution's Apparent Noncompliance, VA Forms 22-8804, and VA Forms 4-5295, will identify the students who were overpaid and will set out in each student's case the actions or omissions by the school which resulted in the finding of potential school liability. (Applicable Federal statutes and regulations will be cited by statute and regulation number). The notice will specify that if the school expresses disagreement concerning liability, VA will commence the School Liability Process and provide the option for a pre-hearing conference.

NOTE 2:  In accordance with 38 U.S.C. § 3685(b)(2), as amended by PL 116-315, section 1019, effective only for overpayments created on or after January 5, 2021, (date of enactment of PL 116-315), “potential school liability” refers only to the amount of student debt (i.e., payments made directly to the student, NOT to the school) being considered for transference to the school.  Payments made directly to a school should not be included in a review of potential school liability as those payments (i.e., tuition and fee payments) are a direct liability of the educational institution under 38 U.S.C. § 3685(b)(2).  Therefore, liability does not need to be transferred to the school through the school liability process and is properly assigned to the school through regular processing (transfer to the DMC).  Overpayments, including overpayments of tuition and fees made directly to a school, that were created prior to January 5, 2021, can be referred for a finding of potential school liability. An overpayment is considered “created” on the date the change in enrollment status is processed within the VA education claims adjudication system, and a debt is created by VA.  The date of creation is not based on the actual date of enrollment, withdrawal, termination, certification to VA, or any other possible dates. 

**7.07  COMMITTEE ON SCHOOL LIABILITY**

---

Each RPO will establish a Committee on School Liability. The purpose of this committee is to review and decide liability decisions when, and if, a school challenges the decision of school liability. This committee should be composed of journeyman VBA employees (GS-9 or greater) who have a basic knowledge of education benefit programs, school reporting requirements and benefits processing. The number may vary by RPO but the committee should be large enough to manage more than one liability review at a time.

**a. Responsibility:** The RPO director (or designee) will select the members of the committee. It is recommended the committee members submit resumes (or a list of suitable skill sets) to the Director’s office for two year terms. The EO will ensure the committee members are in good standing within the RPO. Once selected to the Committee, the member must maintain fully successful performance or better in all performance elements. The role of the committee member is considered a collateral duty to the current position description. Committee term limits are not defined but are recommended to be no less than 2 years but not greater than 4 years. The term limits are determined by the RPO director with consultation with the Director of Education Service. The Committee can be any size, but should be large enough so no committee member would have more than one or two school liability cases at a time.

**b. Committee Chairperson:** The Chairperson will be designated by the RPO Director. This person should be a member of the management team at the RPO, a GS-13 or above. The Chairperson is responsible for the oversight of the Committee's operation and is responsible for ensuring all hearings take place timely, copies of the hearings and committee decisions are prepared accurately and dispatched timely. The Chairperson is also responsible for selecting the members of each liability panel from the current committee.

**c. Liability Panel(s).** Smaller teams or panels are responsible for hearing and deciding the liability cases. The number of the panel is recommended to be a minimum of three but no more than 7. The Committee Chairperson may sit on this panel as a member. Each panel must have its own leader (or chair) selected by the Committee Chairperson. The panel chair should be a GS-12 or greater. It is imperative to remember no panel member must have been involved with the previous decision of the potential school liability for this school. The ECSS or ELR who conducted the survey which found the potential school liability cannot serve on the panel hearing the case. An employee of SSD cannot be the one who validated the debts in preparing the case. However, VCEs who have prepared VA Form 22-8804 may serve on the panel.

**d. Challenges to the Hearing Panel.** Prior to the hearing, the school will be furnished the names and the qualifications of each panel member. The Committee Chairperson will advise the school it has the right to challenge for good cause the qualifications of any panel member. Any challenge must be submitted in writing and received by the RPO Director before the hearing date, The challenge and the Director's disposition thereof will be made a part of the record.

**7.08 ROLE OF REGIONAL COUNSEL**

---

**a. General.** The RC will present the Department's case at the hearing, if a hearing is held. If a hearing is not held, the RC will either prepare a written submission or orally present the evidence for the Committee panel to consider. The RC will also be present at any pre-hearing conference and will assist with framing the issues to be heard at the hearing.

**b. Preparation of Exhibits.** The EO will assist the Regional Counsel in preparing exhibits for the hearing or, if no hearing, for the Committee Panel to consider directly. The exhibits should include:

1. Copies of pertinent school reports from VA claims or other folders. (Do not send original copies.)

2.  VA Form Letter 4-334 and VA Form 4-5237.

3.  The VA Forms 22-8804 and 4-5295 for individual cases.

4.  Any other pertinent documents.

**NOTE:** Entire claimant folders will not be reviewed by the Committee Panel or by the School Liability Appeals Board. Therefore, the exhibits must be prepared carefully and thoroughly.

**7.09  PREHEARING CONFERENCE**

---

When a hearing is requested, a pre-hearing conference will be conducted at the RPO unless the pre-hearing is specifically waived by the school. Hearings are encouraged to be via tele-conferencing whenever possible.

**a. Notice to School and Regional Counsel.** The EO will notify the school by certified letter, return receipt requested, of the date, time, and place of such conference. Regional Counsel will be notified at the same time. It is crucial to coordinate with all the parties to ensure proper preparation time exists. It is recommended notice should be sent a minimum of one week before the hearing date.

**b. General Procedures.** The EO will designate one person who has knowledge of educational procedures to meet with the school representative and the RC to review and discuss the record upon which potential liability is based. This person should be at the GS-12 grade level or above. The representative from the Education Division shall not participate in any later Committee panel decision associated with this school liability case. However, this person shall have authority, at this stage of the proceedings, to recommend modifying or rescinding the initial determination, subject to the EO’s approval. If the school makes a compromise offer at the pre-hearing conference, the RC may conduct preliminary negotiations. (See separate Finance instructions for additional details regarding compromise offers.)

1. In reviewing and discussing the record, the school's representative will be given the opportunity to review those documents upon which the finding of potential liability was based. However, entire claimant folders will not be reviewed by the school representative.

2. The school will be advised of its right to challenge panel members. The list of panel members and their qualifications will be obtained from the Committee chairperson before the pre-hearing.

**c. Conclusion of Pre-hearing Conference.** Every effort will be made to reach agreement at the pre-hearing on factual points such as the date reports were received so the hearing which follows can concentrate on the more basic issues of disagreement. At the conclusion of the pre-hearing conference, a brief memorandum will be prepared by the representative from Education listing the basic unresolved issues, witnesses to be called, hearing date, and any other pertinent data. This memorandum should be signed by the RC and the school representative and will become a part of the record.

**7.10  HEARING**

---

(a) If a request for an evidentiary hearing is made, the chairperson will conduct a fair and impartial hearing on the record, take action to avoid unnecessary delay in the disposition of the proceedings, and maintain order. For these purposes, the chairperson **may:** 

(1) Administer oaths and affirmations. 

(2) Regulate the course of the hearing and the prehearing conference and govern the conduct of participants. 

(3) Examine witnesses. 

(4) Rule on, admit, exclude, or limit evidence. 

(5) Establish the time for filing written testimony and other **written evidence** and other written submissions. 

(6) Order that the hearing be conducted in stages whenever the issues are numerous and complex or the factual record is voluminous. 

(7**) Allow direct and cross-examination of witnesses only to the extent the chairperson determines that such direct and cross-examination may be necessary to resolve disputed issues of material fact**; provided that no direct or cross-examination shall be allowed on questions of law or policy or regarding matters that are not subject to challenge in the evidentiary hearing. All disputed issues of material fact must be identified by the parties before or at the prehearing conference. 

(8) Take any other action for the maintenance of order at the hearing and for the expeditious, fair and impartial conduct of the proceeding. 

(**b) All direct and rebuttal testimony at an evidentiary hearing shall be filed in written form, unless, upon good cause shown, the chairperson, in his or her discretion, determines that oral presentation of such evidence on any particular factual issue will materially assist in the resolution of the issue.** 

(c) 

(1) The chairperson will admit all evidence that is not irrelevant, immaterial, unduly repetitious, or otherwise unreliable or of little probative value. Evidence relating to settlement that would be excluded in the Federal courts under the Federal Rules of Evidence shall not be admissible. 

(2) Whenever any evidence or testimony is excluded by the chairperson as inadmissible, all such evidence will remain a part of the record as an offer of proof. The party seeking the admission of oral testimony may make an offer of proof by means of a brief statement on the record describing the testimony excluded. 

(3) Rulings of the Chair on the admissibility of evidence or testimony, the propriety of direct and cross-examination, and other procedural matters will appear in the record of the hearing and control further proceedings unless reversed by the Chair. 

(4) All objections shall be made promptly or be deemed waived; provided that parties shall be presumed to have taken exception to an adverse ruling. No objection shall be deemed waived by further participation in the hearing. 

The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the following rules 

                **a. Attendance of Witnesses.** Each party shall be responsible for the appearance of witnesses, production of records, and the costs in connection therewith, necessary for the hearing.  VA employees called as witnesses shall be required to appear in accordance with existing regulations. 

**b. Hearing Rules** 

                Rule 1. - The chairperson of the panel shall be in charge and responsible for conducting the hearing including administration of oaths or affirmations, which shall be required of all witnesses who provide oral testimony, and decisions as to admissibility of evidence. The chairperson should be issued VA Form 4505, Identification Card - Delegation of Authority, under VA Regulation 2. 

                Rule 2. - The Chief Counsel will serve as VA's management representative and shall present the government's case. 

                Rule 3. - Rules of evidence applicable in judicial proceedings will not apply. Any written or oral testimony deemed to be of probative value will be admissible. Secondary or hearsay evidence will not be excluded on the basis alone. However, evidence or testimony which is irrelevant, immaterial, cumulative or unduly argumentative or repetitious, may be excluded. The chairperson may limit the number of persons appearing as witnesses. Such limitations must be exercised within reason. 

                Rule 4. - Any panel member, the school representative, or the management representative shall have the right to question any witness called for the hearing.  Each party shall have the right to cross-examine any witness who provides oral testimony so long as the chairperson determines that such cross-examination is necessary to resolve disputed issues of material fact. 

                Rule 5. - Any objection to a ruling by the chairperson regarding the inadmissibility of testimony, documentary evidence, or challenge to a witness, will be made a matter of record together with the substance, in brief, of the testimony intended or other evidence concerned. Documentary evidence objected to may be accepted for filing and future reference. 

                Rule 6. - VA shall make a verbatim stenographic or recorded report of the hearing and shall preserve the stenographic notes or tapes until the transcript is accepted as accurate by both parties. The transcript shall become a permanent part of the record, and a copy  shall be furnished free of cost to the school by certified mail, return receipt requested. The school may utilize a reporter of its choosing, at its expense. If the school wishes its transcript to become part of the record, a copy must be furnished to VA free of cost.  (VA's transcript will be considered accepted if the school does not contest its accuracy within 10 days of receipt.) 

                Rule 7. - All exhibits shall be identified by the chairperson in the order of introduction (numerically for VA exhibits and alphabetically for exhibits introduced by the school). All exhibits shall be attached to the original of the transcript. True copies of exhibits, if requested, shall be made and attached to the copy of the transcript furnished to the school. 

                Rule 8. - The hearing shall be conducted in an orderly manner with dignity and decorum. The conduct of panel members shall be characterized by fairness, impartiality, and cooperativeness. The chairperson shall take such action as may be necessary to maintain decorum. 

                Rule 9. - At the close of the hearing, the chairperson shall inform both parties that they may submit additional written arguments within 10 workdays of the conclusion of the hearing.  The chairperson shall also inform the school that the notice of the decision and the appeal rights, if applicable, will be furnished by the Finance Officer. 

                Rule 10. - The panel shall have no authority to decide a challenge to the constitutionality of statutes and regulations which provide the basis for assessment of school liability. In the event there is such a challenge, the Panel will continue its general duties with respect to hearing the evidence and deliberations and will document the record to show that a constitutional challenge was made, without making any ruling so that such matters will be decided only at the appeal level.

**7.11  COMMITTEE PANEL DECISION AND NOTICE TO SCHOOL**

---

**a. Decision**

1. The Committee panel will convene to consider its decision no earlier than 10 workdays after the conclusion of the hearing, if a hearing was held, to allow time for the other party to submit additional written arguments.

2.  All evidence, including the hearing transcript, will be considered as previously stated.

3.  The decision shall be by majority and shall either affirm, modify or reverse the finding of potential school liability made by the EO. The Committee panel must clearly and fully state its findings and conclusions, and the reasons and basis for the decision. Applicable Federal statutes and regulations must be cited by statute and regulation number. The general format for Statements of the Case should be used. The original decision furnished the school will be signed by the panel members. Any dissenting member may decline to sign and may submit a separate opinion which will be retained as part of the record.

4.  If the Committee panel affirms liability but modifies the period of liability for individual students, a revised VA Form 4-5237 should be attached to the decision showing what changes were made. Revised VA Forms 22-8804 and 4-5295 will also be furnished for the affected students. The panel will request the SSD Chief to prepare VA Form 4-5295 and VA Form 4-5237 whenever recomputation of liability is necessary.

5. The Chairperson of the Committee will carefully review the panel's proposed decision for errors of fact as well as for general editorial improvements. The chairperson may propose changes for the panel members to consider. However, the panel members are responsible for the final decision. The final decision will be referred to the SSD Chief. In addition, a copy of the final decision should be provided to the GI Bill Enforcement and Integrity Team at Education Service (223A).

**b. Notice to School.** The Chairperson of the Committee will prepare a letter to the school enclosing the decision and any dissenting opinion. This letter will be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. Copies with the decision enclosed will be furnished to the RPO Director, the RC, the EO, SSD Chief and the team leader of the GI Bill Enforcement and Integrity Team ([223A](mailto:223A.VBACO@va.gov%20?subject=Part%201%20Chapter%207%20-%20School%20Liability)). If liability is found, the letter will demand payment and will include notice of appellate rights and procedures, stating the 60-day period for such appeal.) If the school does not exercise its appeal rights within the appeal period,

1. The panel decision will become the final Department decision. The original letter to the school will include this information.

2.  It should be noted while a school may request consideration for a compromise to the amount of school liability, the concept of requesting a waiver for all or part of the liability does not apply to school liability.

**c. Records.** The Chairperson of the Committee on School Liability will be responsible for maintaining a complete record for each school liability decision. This should include copies of all correspondence with the school.

**7.12  APPELLATE PROCEDURES**

---

**a. Right of Appeal**

1.  If the school disagrees with the Committee's decision, an appeal may be made to the School Liability Appeals Board (SLAB or Board).  The SLAB is composed of staff from Education Service selected by the Education Service Director.

2. The SLAB will be chaired by a GS-15 Deputy Director or Assistant Director. The members of the board will be Education Service employees at GS-13 or above who, collectively, have an extensive knowledge of all Education benefits to include regulations regarding Compliance Surveys, School Approvals, and Liaison activities.

3. The appeal may be instituted by a letter or email from an official school email address to the RPO Committee on School Liability Chairperson or EO indicating disagreement with the decision and setting forth the alleged errors of fact and law.

4. The appeal must be received in VA within 60 calendar days from the date of the decision letter to the school.  An additional reasonable period, generally not to exceed 30 calendar days, may be allowed if requested, within which to perfect the appeal. The Committee on School Liability Chairperson will determine if an extension may be granted.

**b. Certification of Appeal**

1. The Committee chairperson will review the record before submission to the SLAB and certify by memorandum the record upon which school liability is based, is complete and all procedural requirements have been met.

2. The Committee Chairperson will notify the school the appeal has been certified and witnesses are not allowed to testify on appeal, but the school has the right to have its representative appear before the SLAB. (See [fig. 7.02](#f702) for a sample pattern letter.) The school will be advised to write to the following address if such representation is desired:

Department of Veterans Affairs  
School Liability Appeals Board (22)  
810 Vermont Avenue, NW  
Washington, DC 20420

3. The RPO will forward the complete school liability record to VA Central Office, Education Service (22). If the Board wishes to review individual folders, TIMS access will be granted to each board member for electronic review of the folders.

**c. Composition of the School Liability Appeals Board.** The SLAB shall consist of a chairperson and two board members appointed by the Education Service Director. Each appeal shall be considered by this group. The chairperson will exercise supervision and control over Board functions and will participate in decisions if the two-member panel does not reach a unanimous decision. A board member will be designated to act in the absence or disqualification of the chairperson. Participation on the SLAB is a collateral duty.

**d. Board Procedures.** Review is limited to the issues previously raised by the school that are on the record rather than "de novo". Witnesses will not be permitted to testify on appeal but not present any new argumetns. The school and the RPO Committee shall have the right to have a representative appear before the Board and present oral argument regarding their respective positions. Such oral presentations are highly encouraged via phone or teleconferencing rather than in person hearings. Alternatively, the statement of alleged errors of fact and law submitted by the school may constitute appearance before the Board. If the Board perceives error in an area not addressed in the appeal, it shall have authority to correct such error. The Board may not increase the amount of liability except through the remand procedure of subparagraph i below.

**e. Restrictions on Powers of the Board.** The SLAB shall have no authority to decide a challenge to the constitutionality of statutes and regulations which provide the basis for assessment of school liability. In the event there is such a challenge, the issue or any other legal question raised, shall be referred to the General Counsel for an opinion. All other issues raised by the appeal will be considered and decided by the Board.

**f. Disqualification of Members.** A member of the SLAB shall be disqualified if such member was employed in the office of original jurisdiction at the time the initial decision was prepared or if there are other circumstances which give the impression of bias either for or against the appellant. Such disqualification shall be made a part of the record. If a member is disqualified, the chairperson shall appoint a replacement.

**g. Decision on Appeal.** The SLAB's decision for each case will be either to reverse, to affirm, to modify, or if clarification or further development is deemed necessary, to remand the RPO Committee decision.  The SLAB decision shall be in writing and signed by the chairperson of the SLAB. The decision must set forth specifically the issues, findings of fact and conclusions of law, and the reason for the Board's decision, and wil be the final determination of VA as to school liability.

**h. Notice of Board Decision.** The SLAB will promptly notify the school of its decision by certified mail, return receipt requested, and will include a copy of its decision with the notice letter. The letter will include a statement indicating the Board's decision is the final administrative decision of VA. Copies of the Board's decision will be furnished to the RPO Director, RC, the SSD Chief, the EO, Education Services Prodecures Chief, and the Chairperson of the RPO Committee on School Liability, simultaneously with the release of the decision to the school. If liability is upheld, the SSD Chief will then institute collection action, which will be suspended if suit is filed by the school or the government.

**i. Case on Remand**

1. If the Board remands the case to the RPO Committee on School Liability for further clarification or development, the RC and the school shall be notified and furnished a copy of the remand. The committee panel at the RPO shall have the authority to modify or rescind its earlier decision.

2. The following procedures will apply:

i. If the committee panel affirms the original decision, the case will be returned to the SLAB under the procedures in subparagraph b above.

ii. If the committee panel rescinds the original decision, the  committee chairperson will notify the school.

iii. If the committee panel partially modifies the liability in the school's favor, the school will be requested to advise the Committee within 30 calendar days if it wishes to continue its appeal.

iv. If the committee panel increases the school's liability, the school shall be entitled to the same hearing procedure as is provided in initial determinations. Such a procedure shall be limited to the issue of increased liability.

3. The RPO Committee on School Liability chairperson will inform the school of the committee's decision. He or she will also inform the SLAB if the case is not to be returned to the Board for any reason.

4. Cases returned to the SLAB shall be considered by the original panel and render a decision. If either member of the original panel is not available, a substitute shall be designated by the chairperson.

**SUBCHAPTER II. EXTENT OF POTENTIAL SCHOOL LIABILITY FOR INDIVIDUAL OVERPAYMENTS**

 

**7.13  GENERAL**

---

 A school may be potentially liable for a student’s overpayment directly resulting from either a false certification or a failure to timely report a change in status. This Subchapter provides instructions for determining the extent of potential school liability in individual cases.

**NOTE 1:** The decision as to whether school liability will be assessed will always be made under the guidelines of Subchapter III.

**NOTE 2:** Potential school liability is concerned with potential student debts which the school should be liable. Actual school debt is separate from school liability and should be charged to the school in the usual manner.

**7.14  FALSE CERTIFICATION CASES**

---

False certification includes both intentional and unintentional false certification as described in Subchapter III. When a student’s overpayment results from a false certification, the school may be potentially liable for any overpayment to the student which occurred before the date VA first learned of the false certification.

**a. Claims Processing Procedure.** VCEs should report the entire period covered by the false certification as the period of potential school liability, item 5F, on VA Form 22-8804. (The only exception would be enrollment periods covered by payments made after the date VA first learned of the false certification should be excluded.)

**b. Support Services Division Procedure.** The RPO SSD will compute the amount of potential liability on VA Form 4-5295. This computation will be in accordance with separate Finance instructions.

**7.15 LATE REPORT CASES**

---

This includes the categories "willful failure to report" and "negligent failure to report" described in Subchapter III.

**a. Payments Excluded From Liability.** When late reports result in student overpayments, the school will not be potentially liable for the following:

1. Those amounts paid to the student (payments actually released) before the end of the allowable 30-day reporting period;

2. Those amounts paid to the student (payments actually released) after the report of change in status is received in VA;

3. The amount of an advance payment at the beginning of an enrollment period;

4. The amount of any additional overpayment created on the student from the date of withdrawal back to the beginning of a term because the claimant failed to establish mitigating circumstances in accordance with [38 U.S.C. 3680(a) (3)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3680 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3680)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true).

**b. "Critical Period" Defined.** The "critical period" is the period starting the day after the end of the 30-day reporting period and ending on the day notice of the change in status is received in VA. The "critical period" is needed to compute the period of potential liability as described in subparagraph c below.

**c. Period of Potential School Liability - Late Reporting.** In cases of late reporting, the VCEs will determine the period of potential liability separately for each enrollment period as follows:

1. Determine when the award was authorized in LTS for Chapter 33 claims or BDN for all other education benefit programs.

2. Determine what payments were issued based on this award during the "critical period" and determine the enrollment period covered by these payments. This enrollment period is the period of potential school liability. Remember the potential school liability is for student payments.

**NOTE:** VCEs will determine the period of potential liability by examining the award document and payment histories, when available in LTS or BDN as applicable, and projecting what payments would normally have been made during the "critical period." SSD will be responsible for computing the actual amount of liability and verifying when payments were actually made.

**7.16** **EXAMPLES**

---

The examples below illustrate how to compute the period of potential school liability in late reporting situations. In all cases, it is assumed, unless otherwise stated, the award was processed near the beginning of the term and regular first-of-the-month payments to students were made. However, the principles for determining periods of potential school liability apply equally to cases with irregular monthly payments (e.g., all IHL or nondegree cases under all chapters).

**a. Withdrawal near Beginning of Term.**

Enrollment Period: September 5, 2015 through December 16, 2015 (non-advance payment case)

Last Day of Drop Period: September 25, 2015

Withdrawal: September 21, 2015

End of 30-day period: October 25, 2015

Notice Received in VA: November 15, 2015

Critical Period: October 26 through November 15, 2015

Period of Potential School Liability: October 1 to October 31, 2015 (i.e. the period covered by the payment due on November 1, 2015 to the student)

Reason: School may be liable for the payment issued to the student on November 1, 2015, since this is the only payment during the "critical period."

**b. Advance Payment Case.** Same facts as in subparagraph a above only an advance payment was issued at the beginning of the term.

Period of Potential School Liability: None

Reason: No payment was issued in the "critical period" because of the advance payment. The first payment to the student after the advance payment would have been due on December 1, 2015.

**c. Retroactive Payment Case.** Same facts as in subparagraph a above only the award was not processed until November 2, 2015. The first payment was issued to the student during the "critical period" and covered the period September 5 to October 31.

Period of Potential Liability: September 22 to October 31, 2015.

Reason: School may be liable for the entire overpayment made to the student during the "critical period."

**d. Case with Existing Accounts Receivable.** Same facts as in subparagraph a above only an accounts receivable (74B) of $1,000 existed at the beginning of the term. No student payments were actually issued in the "critical period" but the accounts receivable (74B) was reduced by offset.

Period of Liability: October 1 to October 31, 2015.

Reason: The existence of an accounts receivable (74B) has no bearing on the calculation of potential school liability. In effect, a school may be held liable for erroneous credits to a student’s account as well as for erroneous check amounts actually issued.

**e. Withdrawal - Notice Over 30 Days but No Liability**

Enrollment Period: February 6 to June 9, 2015

Withdrawal: April 10, 2015

End of 30-Day Period: May 10, 2015

Notice Received in VA: May 20, 2015

Critical Period: May 11 through May 20, 2015

Period of Potential Liability: None

Reason: No payments were made during the "critical period."

**f. Reduction and Withdrawal**

Enrollment Period: Full time from January 5 to May 2, 2015

Reduction to 1/2 time: February 26, 2015

Withdrawal: March 27, 2015

End of 30-day periods: March 27, 2015 for reduction and April 26, 2015 for withdrawal.

Notice of Both Changes: April 16, 2015

Critical Period: March 29 through April 16, 2015

Period of Potential Liability: March 1, 2015 to March 31, 2015 (i.e. the period covered by the payment to the student due April 1) for difference between the full-time rate and the one-half-time rate only. (Item 5H of VA Form 22-8804 will be completed to show one-half-time training.)

Reason: No potential school liability can be considered for the withdrawal since notice of the withdrawal was timely filed. However, the school is potentially liable for the overpayment resulting from the training time change since this report was not timely filed. The extent of liability for March is the difference between the full-time and the one-half-time rates although the entire payment from March 27 to the end of the month is an overpayment.

**g. Multiple Adjustments**

Enrollment Period: September 12, 2015 through December 22, 2015 at full time. Reenrollment February 6, 2016 through May 23, 2016.

Reduction to 1/2 time: November 15, 2015

Resumption to FT: February 6, 2016

Withdrawal: March 5, 2016

End of 30-day period for reduction: December 15, 2015

End of 30-day period for withdrawal: April 4, 2016

Notice of all changes: April 15, 2016

Critical Periods: December 16 through December 22, 2015 and April 5, 2016 thru April 15, 2016.

Period of Potential Liability: December 1 to December 22, 2015 (i.e. the period covered by the payment due January 1 and part of the period covered by the payment due March 1, 2016 to the student).

Reason: The school may be liable for part of the overpayment to the student resulting from the reduction in training since notice of the reduction was late. There can be no liability resulting from the withdrawal, even though notice was late, since no payments were due in the critical period from April 4 to April 15, 2016.

**7.17  FAILURE TO REPORT AND FALSE CERTIFICATION DISTINGUISHED**

---

It may be difficult at times to distinguish between failure to report and false certification. The distinction is important since the period of potential school liability will be greater in false certification cases. The following examples should be helpful in making the distinction:

**a**. A school has a fall term from August 25, 2015 through December 10, 2015. There is a 20-day "drop" period. The school submitted an enrollment certification signed August 30, 2015, indicating a student enrolled August 25, 2015, for the fall term. On November 15, 2015, the school furnished notice the student registered but failed to attend. This is a case of failure to promptly report a change in status, not of false certification. The period of potential liability would be from September 1 to September 30.

**b**. Assume the same situation as in subparagraph a above except the initial enrollment certification was signed August 30, 2015, after the end of the "drop" period. This is a case of false certification. The school would be potentially liable for the entire student overpayment from October 5 through October 31, 2015.

**7.18  NONPUNITIVE GRADES ASSIGNED**

---

School liability is generally not applicable to the part of a student’s overpayment caused by the failure to establish mitigating circumstances. In the case of non-punitive grades at the end of a term without mitigating circumstances, there would be no potential school liability since the amount of the student’s overpayment would not be affected by a failure to timely report.

**NOTE:** If a student withdraws from any course, the school must always report the last date of attendance regardless of whether a punitive or non-punitive grade is assigned. Potential school liability may be applicable if the withdrawal is not reported timely.

**SUBCHAPTER III.** **GUIDELINES FOR SCHOOL LIABILITY DECISIONS**

**7.19  GENERAL**

---

The guidelines in this Subchapter will be used whenever potential school liability is considered by the EO, the RPO's Committee on School Liability, or the School Liability Appeals Board. It must be emphasized one overall decision will be made with respect to all of the individual cases for a particular school which have been identified for potential school liability.

**7.20 DISCUSSION OF KEY CONCEPTS**

---

These are the basic concepts found in [38 U.S.C. 3685](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3685 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3685)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) under which a school may be held liable.

**a. Willful Failure to Report.** This refers to intentional failure or refusal by the school to make required reports of enrollment changes. It also includes intentional failure or refusal to make timely reports. To hold a school liable under this concept, the evidence must show with reasonable certainty there was an intentional failure on the part of the school to make required reports or to make timely reports.

**b. Negligent\* Failure to Report.** This refers to a negligent failure to make reports of enrollment changes in a timely manner.

**c. False Certification.** This is a certification which is contrary to the actual facts. The falsity may involve enrollment dates, hours of training, or any other item certified. There are two types of false certification:

1. Willful. Such cases should initially be referred to the Office of Inspector General (OIG) for consideration of fraud. If the OIG returns the case with an opinion there is no apparent violation of Federal criminal statutes, potential school liability for false certification may then be considered. To hold a school liable, the evidence must show with reasonable certainty the school intentionally made a false certification.

2. Negligent.\* Potential school liability for negligent false certification may be considered when the school appears to have been negligent in making accurate reports to VA.

**\* Negligent: (for the purposes of determining potential school liability) an action which is not intentional but lacks attention, care, or concern; or an act which is not intentional but demonstrates a failing to exercise the care expected of a reasonably prudent person in like circumstances**

**7.21 GUIDELINES WHEN NEGLIGENCE IS THE ISSUE**

---

EOs have the authority to determine whether a school should be referred as a potential school liability case. This decision requires several factors to consider if the school should be held liable for the errors created on students. In many cases, the fundamental issue to be decided is whether or not the school negligently failed to report or timely report changes in enrollment or negligently submitted false (erroneous) certifications. No simple error rate can be given which would define negligent reporting. While the CELO has ensured the surveys were done completely and have recommended consideration of potential school liability, the EO must consider all relevant factors before making this decision. The EO must determine if the school failed to exercise reasonable care in making timely and accurate certifications to VA.

**a. Allowance for Occasional Clerical Error or Occasional Administrative Delay**

1.  Consider the number of reporting errors compared to the number of VA students enrolled over a given period; and

2.  Consider the number of reporting errors compared to the approximate number of required reports for the period covered by the survey. A general rule of thumb for an EO and CELO to consider is did the survey discover an error rate of over 30% resulting in overpayments either willfully or negligently being delayed in reporting.

**b. The School's Past Reliability in Reporting.** Consider the findings of past compliance surveys and the school's response to any reporting deficiencies which were brought to its attention. Is this the first instance where the school appears to have made this error? Ensure to discuss this with the CELO to develop what if anything has recently changed at the school.

**c. The Adequacy of the School's Reporting System.** A school will be considered negligent if it does not establish a reporting system which can produce accurate and timely reports. However, a school with an adequate reporting system will not be held liable if inaccurate or late reports were due to computer or human error which could not have been prevented by the exercise of reasonable care.

**d. The Extent of Noncompliance with Reporting Requirements.** Consider the nature and seriousness of the reporting errors, and consider the length of delay involved in cases of delayed reports. EOs must consider the amount of the potential school liability as well. Schools need to be held responsible if they are the reason for debts. Before the EO rules a school should be reviewed for potential school liability, these rules should be reviewed and discussed with the CELO. If negligence is not obvious, additional training at the SCO level may be required, rather than consideration of potential school liability.

**7.22 RULE OF REASONABLE CERTAINTY**

---

School liability decisions will always be considered on the basis of the rule of reasonable certainty. This rule dictates a determination of school liability is not founded merely on conjecture or likelihood or even probability, but rather on circumstances sufficiently compelling to warrant a reasonable person to believe the determination is correct.

**SUBCHAPTER IV.** **STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE ON POTENTIAL SCHOOL LIABILITY**

**7.23 IDENTIFICATION PHASE**

---

The ELR, ECSS or SAA who performs the compliance survey review must confer with the CELO of jurisdiction when it appears a school should be referred for potential school liability. School liability is a serious charge. It is highly recommended if an ECSS believes potential school liability needs to be considered, 100% of the school’s records should be reviewed. The CELO can assist the ECSS in determining when 100% may not be required. If 100% survey was not completed, the CELO must indicate why a referral for potential school liability is requested without a full review of all school records.

**7.24 DETERMINATION OF POTENTIAL LIABILITY**

---

The determination of potential school liability lies within the authority of the EO. The CELO will prepare a memo to the EO advising a compliance survey has been completed and findings indicate potential school liability exists. The CELO will also provide a copy of the executive summary to the EO for review.

Before the EO can decide if the school should be considered for potential school liability, a decision regarding negligent or willful false certification (or willful failure to report) is required. The EO and CELO should discuss the referral in detail. If it appears a decision is required to determine **willful** false certification or failure to report, the EO will refer the entire survey to the OIG for their consideration. If the OIG returns the case with an opinion there is no apparent violation of Federal criminal statutes, school liability for false certification may then be considered. If OIG determines the school was willful in their reporting or false certification, potential school liability may still be considered. Take no additional actions on those claims without discussing with the OIG and Education Service for guidance.

Once the EO has determined the school should be considered for potential school liability, notification should be sent to the Debt Management Center (DMC) to advise them. By contacting DMC early in the process, they can ensure the proper notifications regarding any existing overpayments or new ones are properly coded.

**7.25****RPO CLAIMS PROCESSING WHEN POTENTIAL SCHOOL LIABILITY HAS BEEN DETERMINED**

---

VCEs at the RPO need to complete the following procedures. The decision regarding which VCEs will do this work is subject to local RPO determinations. The VCEs must be trained in this process and have a good understanding of how to complete all of the required forms and letters. Extreme diligence is required when working potential school liability claims.

**a. Specific Claims Processing for Chapter 33 claims:**

1. Add a new work product to LTS

2. Click on the “enrollment tab” in LTS and select the blue arrow drop down key for each enrollment period which needs to be amended.

3. Using either the “correction” function or the “add Amendment” function in LTS, the VCE will make the appropriate adjustments to modify each enrollment.

4. Click the “Save” button after adjusting all necessary enrollment periods.

5. Go to the “Work Product Summary” screen in LTS and select the “Authorize with No Payments” field on the top of the screen.

6. If there are no incorrect housing payments scheduled for the term, skip to step 8. Otherwise, proceed to Step 7.

7. If there is an adjustment (reduction/termination) needed to a housing award for the current enrollment period, then:

i.  Do a FIST command in BDN to the F34 Screen

ii. On the F34 screen put an X next to 06H and enter a new no pay date based on the date last paid. Use the cross-reference number and any cost code from the original housing payment.

iii. A second VCE must FAUT the transaction.

iv. Ensure a copy of the FIST screen is captured into TIMS prior to the FAUT action.

8. Complete VA Form 22-8804 based on the period of potential school liability and capture a copy into the claimant’s TIMS folder. It is important to remember each potential school liability should be entered separately on the VA Form 22-8804. Remember a separate line must be used for housing or books and supplies. All potential student overpayments should be included. Tuition and fees overpayments should not be reported on VA Form 22-8804.

9. Place a FLASH in the claimant’s TIMS folder alerting the claim is under review for potential school liability and the dates of concern.

10. If a student’s folder is at a different RPO, the VCE should be allowed the Claims Processing module at the other RPO. Transferring of the folders for potential school liability is not encouraged. Once the VCE has completed the actions needed for the liability portion of the claimant’s folder, the VCE will no longer need access to the other RPO.

**b. Specific Claims Processing for Non-Chapter 33 claims**

1. If there is an active master record (A), adjust the award to correct all award actions from DLP.

2. VCE should ensure a debt is not created in BDN for the potential school liability period.

3. Complete VA Form 22-8804 based on the period of potential school liability and capture a copy into the claimant’s TIMS Folder.

4. Place a FLASH in the claimant’s TIMS folder alerting the claim is under review for potential school liability and the dates of concern.

5. If the student’s TIMS folder is at a different RPO, the VCE should be allowed access to Claims Processing Module at the other RPO. Transferring of the folders for potential school liability is not encouraged. Once the VCE has completed the actions needed for the liability portion of the TIMS folder, the VCE will no longer need access to the other RPO.

 

**EXTREMELY IMPORTANT**

It is critical to remember no matter which benefit has been used, VCEs must exert care to NOT create overpayments to claimants during this process unless the debts are outside the enrollment period under review.

**7.26 NOTICE TO SCHOOL AND VA RESPONSE**

---

Once the EO has the initial memo from the CELO, copies of the Compliance Survey, and copies of VA Form 22-8804 for each overpayment, he/she will prepare a memo to the SSD Chief.

It is the responsibility of the RPO SSD Chief to validate the debts.

In order to validate the debts, the SSD will prepare VA Form 5237, Listing of Students Overpaid as Result of Institution’s Apparent Noncompliance, and VA Form 24-5295, Institutional Liability Computation Sheet for each student. Once the SSD Chief has validated the net potential liability of the institution, he/she will prepare VA Form Letter 4-334, Notice of Intent to Hold Institution Liable for Educational Assistance Overpayments over the RPO Director’s signature. The school must receive this letter along with all of the prepared VA Forms, attachments and/or other documents noting specific potential liability issues to school. These documents should be sent via certified mail with return receipt.

The school has 30 days to respond to this notice. The EO is responsible for preparing hearings, etc. should the school respond.

**7.27****COMMITTEE ON SCHOOL LIABILITY**

---

Each RPO must establish a Committee on School Liability.

**a**. The Committee can be any size, but should be large enough so no committee member would have more than one or two school liability cases at a time.

**b**. Each panel will consist of at least 3 members but no more than 7 who will make the determination of school liability.

**c.** Committee term limits are not defined but are recommended to be no less than 2 years but not greater than 4 years. The term limits are determined by the RPO director with consultation with the Director of Education Service.

**d.** The RPO Director has the authority to designate the committee.

**e.** The Chairperson of the committee should be a GS-13 or above

**f.**  Each Committee person should be no lower than a GS-9 (journeyman status)

**g**. The EO will ensure the committee members are in good standing within the RPO.

**h.** All positions within the Regional Office are encouraged to volunteer for the committee. This includes all ELRs and ECSSs. However, no ELR or ECSS who has performed survey or liaison visits at the school under review for potential school liability may serve on the panel making the decision.

**i**. The Chairperson of each panel must be at the GS-12 grade level or above. This person will be responsible for conducting the hearings.

**7.28** **BASIC STEPS ONCE VA FORM LETTER 4-334 HAS BEEN SUBMITTED**

---

Pre-Hearing conference – a member of the Committee on School Liability must sit on this. This member cannot participate in the eventual hearing or decision and Regional Counsel will participate in pre-hearing

**a**. Hearing – School will present case to panel selected from the Committee on School Liability. RC will present VA’s case to panel.

**b**. Panel will meet no earlier than 10 workdays from the hearing date to make decision.  It's left to the panel members and the Chair's discretion when/if panel members can review any/all evidence presented at the hearing prior to reconvening no sooner than 10 workdays from the hearing. 

**c**. A decision shall be reached in a reasonable time as determined by the Chair.  Once the panel has made a decision, the EO will send notice of decision to school.

**d.** School has 60 days to appeal to the School Liability Appeals Board (VACO)

**e**. Chairperson of the School Liability Committee will notify DMC of the referral of potential school liability once VA Form Letter 4-334 has been released.

---

|  |
| --- |
| This is a NOTICE OF INTENT OF REFERRAL to the Committee on School Liability to decide whether to hold your institution liable for certain overpayments of educational assistance benefits. A review of our records indicates overpayments of VA educational benefits to your students, as shown by the attachments to this letter. An initial review indicates that these overpayment(s) may have been created as the result of your institution’s noncompliance with proper and timely reporting requirements.  Section 3685, Title 38, United States Code (USC) provides that if an overpayment is created as the result of (1) willful or negligent failure of an educational institution to report to the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) excessive absences from a course, or discontinuance or interruption of a course, or (2) false (erroneous) certification by an educational institution, the amount of such overpayment shall constitute a liability of such institution, and may be recovered in the same manner as any other debt due the United States.  In accordance with VA regulations (38 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) § 21.4009), your case is being referred to the Committee on School Liability to make a final determination whether these overpayments are the results of any of the above actions on the part of your school and, therefore, will constitute liability and debt on your school.  If the Committee finds your school liable, your institution will be responsible for repaying overpayment(s) which now total $. This amount, however, is subject to reduction in accordance with the amount(s) recovered from the Veteran(s) and/or eligible person(s).  Your school has several options regarding this assessment of potential school liability.  1. Your school may waive its right to a review by the Committee on School Liability by agreeing to pay the validated amount.  If you wish to pursue this option, the agreement must be in writing by the individual authorized to make such a decision.  You will receive a copy of the letter(s) sent to affected students and will need to follow the instructions to submit payment to the Debt Management Center (DMC) on their behalf; or,  2. Your school may pursue a review by the Committee on School Liability by requesting both a pre-hearing and a hearing with the Committee before it makes its final decision; or,  3. Your school may pursue a review by the Committee on School Liability by requesting a hearing with the Committee but waiving the pre-hearing before it makes its final decision; or,  4. Your school may pursue a review by the Committee on School Liability but waive both the pre-hearing and the hearing with the Committee before it makes its final decision.  Your requests for either the pre-hearing or the hearing should be in writing. Communicating by electronic means is acceptable as long as it is on an appropriate business electronic mail address. You are invited to submit any facts or information for rebuttal to the attached evidence of the potential liability.  The usual requirement for retention of VA student records is three years from termination of enrollment. However, you are requested to retain all records pertaining to the affected students until the potential school liability issue is resolved. The authority for this request is 38 CFR 21.4209(f).  The purpose of a pre-hearing conference is to give you and your local representative(s), if any, an opportunity to review and discuss the record, upon which our assessment of your potential liability is based so that issues may be properly framed. This conference would also provide an opportunity to determine persons who may be called as witnesses at the hearing and to set a mutually convenient date for the hearing. If you waive the pre-hearing conference, you are requested to submit your documentary evidence and list of proposed hearing witness by mail (electronic mail is acceptable). Upon receipt of this submission, we will send this agency’s witness list as well as information about the panel members who will make the final decision in your case.  If your agreement to pay, your rebuttal evidence or hearing request is not received by the VA within 30 days of the date of this letter, our final decision as to the potential school liability will be referred to the Committee on School Liability for their decision.  Sincerely,  RPO Director |

**Figure 7.01.  VA Form Letter 4-334**

 

 

|  |
| --- |
| Dear \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_:  We have received your letter appealing our decision holding your institution liable for certain overpayments of educational benefits. We are forwarding your case to VA Central Office- Education Service - School Liability Appeals Board. This Board will make a final decision as to your liability based on careful review of the entire record, including your letter of appeal.  It is not necessary your school be personally represented at the Board's review; however, both your school and the Government have the right to have a representative appear before the Board and present oral arguments regarding respective positions. However, your letter of appeal may constitute appearance before the Board. Testimony by witnesses is not allowed on appeal.  If you intend representation before the Board, please write, within 10 days of the date of this letter, to:  Chairperson of the School Liability Appeals Board (22)  Department of Veterans Affairs  810 Vermont Avenue, NW  Washington, D.C. 20420.  Appropriate arrangements for your representation will then be made by the Board.  The Board will promptly notify you in writing of its decision.  Sincerely,  RPO Director |

**Figure 7.02 Sample Pattern Letter Advising School of Certification of Appeal**

**APPENDIX A: SCHOOL LIABILITY PROCEDURES FOR SUPPORT SERVICES DIVISION AT REGIONAL PROCESSING OFFICES**

---

**a. General.** This document rescinds the DVB Circular 22-79-6, Appendix D in its entirety.

Collection actions against Veterans or other eligible persons are separate from actions against an educational institution and are not affected by the provisions of this document.

**b. Background.**

1**.** Schools are required to report without delay, the enrollment, interruption, and termination of attendance for each person enrolled in all education programs under Title 38 and Title 10. It does not apply to the section 901 program.

2**.** VA may hold a school liable for an overpayment to a claimant if the overpayment was made as a result of

 i. Willful or negligent failure of the school to report excessive absences from a course, or discontinuance or interruption; or

ii. Willful or negligent false certification.

This applies to all education programs under Title 38 and Title 10. It does not apply to the section 901 program. Only the Education Officer at each RPO has the authority to determine potential school liability.

**c.** School liability may be recovered in the same manner as any other debt due the United States. However, any amount collected from a school shall be reimbursed if the overpayment is subsequently recovered from the claimant ([38 U.S.C. 3685](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3685 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3685)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true)). VA may not withhold the annual school reporting fee unless liability is not contested or liability has been upheld by a final decree of a court of appropriate jurisdiction ([38 U.S.C. 3684](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3684 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3684)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true)).

**d. RPO Claims Processing Referrals to the Finance Activity of the Support Services Division (SSD).** In cases not involving potential fraud, the Education Officer (EO) (or designee) will notify the Chief of Finance of any school or training establishment determined to be held for school liability. The EO will direct VCEs to prepare VA Form 22-8804, Report of Potential School Liability, for each student for the affected enrollment period. These forms will be placed in the claimant’s TIMS folder, and a list of all affected students will be provided to the Chief of Finance. The Chief of Finance will assign the Finance activity the act of validating the amounts of school liability and completion of appropriate forms.

**e. Computation of Amounts of Liability.**

1. After carefully reviewing all of the VA Form 22-8804s and payment records, the Finance activity will prepare VA Form 24-5295, Institutional Liability Computation Sheet, which will be completed to show the amount for which the school may be liable for the periods indicated on the VA Form 22-8804 in each case. In order to complete the computation sheet, it will be necessary to use information appearing on the VA Form 8804, the guidance instructions on the VA Form 24-5295 and information in the TIMS folder.

2. After VA Form 24-5295 is prepared, it will be printed along with prints of all the VA Form 22-8804s.

3. The copies of all VA Form 22-8804s and VA Form 24-5295 will be included in the packet submitted to the school. These will be attached to the letter prepared and sent to the school. This letter is available for review in PCGL. The RPO Director or designee will release the letter along with the packet of documents.

**f. VA Form 24-5295, Institutional Liability Computation Sheet.**

1. VA Form 24-5295 is to be used in conjunction with VA Form 22-8804. VA Form 22-8804 will be prepared by VCEs as stated above. Once these forms are completed, the EO will inform the Chief of Finance that a case of potential school liability exists. Information from each VA Form 22-8804 will be transferred to VA Form 24-5295 and computations will be made to determine school liability amounts. VA Form 24-5295 will be prepared in all cases when VA Form 22-8804 is received in Finance activity.

2. Columnar Instructions

i. Column 1: Transfer the dates shown in Column 5F on VA Form 22-8804 to column 1 on VA Form 24-5295. These dates will generally not be the same as the dates of the total overpayment period. The periods shown in column 5F of the VA Form 22-8804 are broken down by rate period. This means that every time a rate change occurs (change of training time, change in legislated rates, etc.), a new period (line item) will be established.

ii. Column 2: Transfer the monthly benefit rate shown in Column 5S on VA Form 22-8804 to column 2 of the VA Form 24-5295. This will be the original rate awarded for the period in column 1.

iii. Column 3: Compute the amount of benefits that was originally authorized for this period by multiplying the monthly rate in column 2 by the number of full months in column 1, plus the prorated amounts due for any partial months; enter this amount in column 3. This amount corresponds to the “Paid” portion of a “Paid and Due” statement, and as such is the amount that should have been paid for the period in column 1 based upon award information or record.

iv. Column 4: Transfer the monthly benefit rate as shown on column 5E on VA Form 22-8804 to column 4 of the VA Form 24-5295. This will be the new rate awarded for the period in Column 1.

v. Column 5: Compute the amount of benefits now authorized for this period by multiplying the monthly rate in column 4 by the number of full months in column1, plus the prorated amounts due for any partial months. Enter this number in column 5. This figure will correspond with the “Due” portion of a “Paid and Due” statement.

vi. Column 6: By examining the TIMS folder, a review of BDN screens, and/or LTS screens, determine if any disbursements were made for the liability period, after notification of change of status was received from the school, or after it was learned by compliance survey (see column 5C on VA Form 22-8804). In the case of false certification, determine from column 5E of VA Form 22-8804 the date that the VA learned that the certification was false. Since there will be no liability to a school for any payments made after such date, it will be important to examine the TIMS folder for special payments, awards dated subsequent to award periods, award rejects, or any other actions which may have resulted in payments made after notification and for the liability period. All such disbursements may be shown as one total.

vii. Column 7: Determine from the BDN or LTS master record (or TIMS folder) if any collections or offsets have been made. Any such collections made may be shown as one total.

viii. Column 8: Column 3 less columns 5, 6, and 7.

3. When completing VA Form 24-5295 for a student with a prior overpayment, it is important to note the monthly benefits which are being offset rather than paid out to the student are still to be treated as payments for the purpose of establishing liability.

**EXAMPLE:** .A student at school “A” is attending full time and is awarded benefits from January 8, 2015 to March 23, 2015 at $1,717.00 per month. It is subsequently determined after the term is over that the student never attended and an overpayment in the amount of $4,349.73 is established. The student now enrolls at school “B” full time and is awarded benefits from January 5, 2016 to March 24, 2016 at $1,789.00 per month. Benefits for this period are not paid to the student, but are used to offset the overpayment created by the first award period. A compliance survey determines the student in fact, never attended school “B” either, and it also places school “B” in a liability status. In calculating the amount of liability to school “B”, the amounts of benefits offset will be considered as payments.

**g. Administrative Expense Consideration.** After computing amounts of potential liability on VA Forms 24-5295, the Chief of Finance may consider and confer with the EO on whether to forego all future pre-collection and collection activity. The Chief of Finance has termination authority on debts under $40,000. Refer to [VA Financial Policies and Procedures, Volume XII – Chapter 1I Termination of Collection Action and Close Out of Debt](https://www.va.gov/finance/docs/VA-FinancialPolicyVolumeXIIChapter01I.pdf) for details. Although this termination authority exists at any time during the collection procedure, it is during the early pre-collection state when VA Form 24-5295s are completed that the Chief of Finance should, if ever, seriously consider any possible termination of overall school liability procedures. The intent here is for the Chief of Finance to consider termination as early as practicable so as to avoid excessive and unnecessary further costs should termination be affected at a later date.

**h. Notice to School of Potential Liability.** The responsibility of notifying the school falls on the RPO Director rather than on the Chief of Finance. However, the Chief of Finance is still responsible for ensuring the entire packet is prepared for the RPO director to release.

VA Form 4-5237 and the VA Form Letter 4-334, Notice of Intent to Hold Institution Liable for Education Assistance Overpayments must be completed by the Chief of Finance to support the determination of the school liability. Extreme care should be taken to insure that when the school’s copy of the VA Form 4-5237 is prepared, student’s personal information (i.e. Social Security Numbers) is redacted. Releasing this information is not allowed under the Privacy Act. If the school does not respond within 30 days, the Chief of Finance will follow paragraph 8 below to begin the collection process.  If the school replies with evidence or requests a hearing/prehearing conference, the collection process under paragraph 8 will begin upon receiving a decision from the Chairperson of the Committee of School Liability under paragraph 10.

**i. Accounts Receivable.**Using the total amount of liability shown on all VA Forms 24-5295, an accounts receivable will be established in the Centralized Administrative Accounting Transaction System (CAATS) with a billing document (BD) transaction and recorded in the debt station for each school.  This record will include the name, facility code and address of the school, and will reflect all significant collection actions in the case starting with the receipt of the finding of potential school liability from the Education Division, and the date VA first learned of overpayments.  VA Form 4-5237, Listing of Students Overpaid as Result of Institution’s Apparent Noncompliance will be uploaded as an attachment to support the BD transaction in CAATS.

**j. Miscellaneous.**

1. **Waivers.** A waiver of a student’s overpayment (VA waives its right to collect), does not constitute a reduction of liability to the school.

2. **Recalculations**. A recalculation of the amount of liability of a school may be performed annually upon school request, or if the Chief of Finance wishes to bring the account into current status. In addition, a recalculation will be performed when a school indicates a willingness to make a payment.

3**. Collections and Offsets.** Any reduction of a student’s receivable, by collection or offset, will be used to reduce the liability of the school whenever a recalculation is made.

4**. School Reporting Fees.**

i. School Reporting Fees may be withheld under the following conditions:

ii.  An uncontested school liability determination by the RPO Committee on School Liability. If the school fails to appeal the decision within the 60-day appeal period, it can be assumed the school accepts the decision of the Committee. This assumption is based upon the school’s failure to take advantage of its administrative remedy.

iii.  Subsequent to a final decree by a court of appropriate jurisdiction.

iv**.**. School Reporting Fees may not be withheld subsequent to the upholding of a liability decision by the Appeals Board. The only exception to this rule occurs when the school makes a positive gesture of acceptance of the Appeals Board’s Decision.

v. When withholding of the annual School Reporting Fee is to be accomplished, the Chief of Finance will prepare a memorandum that identifies the institutions from which the annual Reporting Fee is to be withheld. The memorandum will be forwarded to the Chief Education Liaison Officer of the state where the school is, in October of each year. Copies should be sent to the RPO director, the RPO Education Officer and Education Service as well. Refer to [MP-4, Part IV, Chapter 10.12, Withholding Of Annual Reporting Fees](https://vbaw.vba.va.gov/VBAORM/fin/fin241c/mp4_partiv/Chapter_10_AnnualReportingFee.docx)

vi. **Multiple Liability Situations.** In the event of a multiple liability situation, a school is found liable for one group of errors, when liability has already been determined for another group of errors, liability amounts will not be lumped together. Collection from the school for each group of errors will be pursued independently. Only when the entire collection procedures for both groups have run their respective course will the liability amount be consolidated.

**k. Notice of Decision.** The Chairperson of the Committee of School Liability will release the decision of the Committee. If liability is found, however, Chief of Finance must ensure the appropriate standard collection letter is prepared for release over the RPO Director’s signature.

In the letter notifying the school of its liability, the language will demand payment and will include notice of appellate rights and procedures, stating the allowable 60-day period for filing such appeal. This letter will also state that if the school does not exercise its right of appeal within the appeal period, the Committee decision will become the final Agency decision. If no appeal is made, the Chief of Finance will proceed with standard collection procedures.

**l. Appeal by School.**

1**. Certification to VACO School Liability Appeals Board.** When the school files its appeal, the Chief of Finance will check to insure that the appeal letter does in fact indicate disagreement with the decision and sets forth the alleged errors of fact and law relied upon as the basis for the appeal. An appeal will be considered timely filed if received within 60 days, or 90 days if the school requests extra time in order to perfect appeal, from the date of the decision notice letter to the school. When the Chief of Finance finds that the school’s appeal letter is timely received and adequate in content as described above, the Chief of Finance will notify the Committee Chairperson. The Committee Chairperson will then forward the entire decision to the School Liability Appeals Board in Education Service.

2.**. Appeals Board Decision.** A copy of the Appeals Board’s decision, along with the appeals package, will be forwarded to the Chief of Finance when the Board releases the decision to the school. (A copy will also be sent to Regional Counsel representing the RPO). Upon receipt of this decision, if liability is affirmed or modified, the Chief of Finance will proceed against the school with collection action. However, collection action will be suspended if the Chief of Finance is notified that a lawsuit has been filed.

3**. Appeals Board Remand.** The Appeals Board will remand the case through the Chief of Finance to the Chairperson of the Committee on School Liability for clarification or development. There are several possibilities due to remand.

i. The Committee on School Liability affirms liability and the case is to be returned to the Appeals Board. In this instance, the Committee Chairperson will forward the case back to the Appeals Board. The Committee Chairperson will also inform the school the case has been returned to the Appeals Board without changes in the original Committee decision.

ii.The Committee on School Liability reverses the original decision completely. In this instance, the Committee Chairperson will notify the Chief of Finance who in turn will notify the Appeals Board. The Committee Chairperson will advise the school by letter that collection action is being terminated.

iii. The Committee partially modifies the liability in the school’s favor. In this instance, the Committee Chairperson, in cooperation with the Chief of Finance, will notify the school of this modification and simultaneously ask whether the school wishes to stop all further appellate action. This notice letter will also indicate VA’s resumption of collection action should the school desire to stop its appeal. If the school requests that appellate action be continued, the Committee Chairperson and the Chief of Finance will then recertify the case as amended to the Appeals Board for final decision as to the debt remaining.

iv. The Committee increases the school’s liability. In this instance, the Committee Chairperson will forward to the Chief of Finance, a copy of the Committee decision increasing liability, and the Chief of Finance will provide the Chairperson with the new amount of liability. The Chairperson will then provide the school with this new decision and liability, as well as opportunity for new hearing procedures. The Chief of Finance will then need only to adjust the records to reflect the new amount of the debt. After any new hearings, etc., the Chief of Finance will receive the final Committee decision and package, at which time he/she will recertify the entire package to the Appeals Board.

**m. Recovery Actions.**

1. If a recovery is made from a school at any time, the amount recovered will not be used to reduce the indebtedness of any overpaid trainee. If a recovery has been made from a student, no refunds will be made to a school until the full amount of school liability has been recovered from the school. Refund may be made when an annual recalculation reveals that a total in excess of the school’s liability amount has been collected from students and the school combined.

2. Any monies recovered from a school will be applied to the accounts receivable and returned to the appropriation 36X0137 Readjustment Benefits, VA. Refunds to a school will be made from appropriation 36X0137 station funds. Debit 4043 (3579), Credit 1012. Do not post school liability assessment to the general ledger account 1217. Consider only as a memorandum receivable and as contingent liability to basic indebtedness of the student.

3. Debt Management Center (DMC) has jurisdiction for debts of Veterans and other eligible persons but not for collection from schools. Therefore, school liability cases are not to be referred to DMC.

4. When collection information is required in order to make a recalculation of school liability balances, stations may make direct inquiries to the system at any time.

5. Collection action on school liability should be pursued in the same manner as any other third party station debts. Refer to MP4, Part IV, Chapter 11 – Station Debt Processes.

**n. Compromise Offers**

1.**General.** Debts due VA from the school liability program may be considered for compromise should such an offer be tendered. The only difference in considering the acceptability of such an offer versus any other debt is that the school will not be required to submit financial information. The school's ability to pay will be assumed in the absence of any indications or allegations to the contrary. Compromises on debts in excess of $100,000 will be forwarded to DMC for referral to the Department of Justice.

2. **Offer Received Before Pension Management Center (PMC) Committee on Waivers and Compromises (COWC) of Jurisdiction Makes Decision.** Should an offer of compromise be made by a school before a debt has been established (e.g., at a prehearing conference or at a hearing) the following procedure will apply. Refer to [VA Financial Policies and Procedures, Volume XII, Chapter 1C, Compromise of Debts](https://www.va.gov/finance/docs/VA-FinancialPolicyVolumeXIIChapter01C.pdf).

i. Any reasonable offer of compromise (i.e., not a frivolous offer, or an offer below a predetermined level of acceptability) made at any time, will be referred by the Regional Counsel to the Chief of Finance. Further school liability procedures will be suspended pending the resolution of the offer.

ii. In the case of potential debts under $1,000, the Chief of Finance is authorized to negotiate with the school with regard to the amount of the final settlement. The Chief of Finance is also authorized to accept or reject any compromise offer in this debt range.

iii. In the case of potential debts between $1,000 and $100,000 the Chief of Finance is authorized, after consultation with Regional Counsel, to negotiate with the school with regard to the amount of a conditional final settlement. The Chief of Finance must inform the school that his or her decision is subject to confirmation from the PMC COWC of jurisdiction. Once the Chief of Finance feels that he or she has received the best offer a school is willing to make, the case will be referred to the COWC. The Chief of Finance may attach a nonbinding recommendation to the referral. The COWC will issue its decision within 5 days if possible, and the Chief of Finance, will advise the school of the Committee's decision.

iv. In the case of potential debts in excess of $100,000, the Chief of Finance is authorized, after consultation with Regional Counsel, to negotiate with the school with regard to the amount of a conditional final settlement. The Chief of Finance must inform the school that he/she is authorized only to recommend acceptance or rejection of this offer, however, and that the final decision rests with the Department of Justice. He/she will then contact Education Service for guidance. If necessary, the offer, supporting documentation and recommendation of the Chief of Finance will be referred to DMC.

v. For the purpose of considering a "pre-debt" offer of compromise only, such a potential debt may be considered as an established debt subject to collection. No referral to or consideration by the RPO Committee on School Liability will be required. If an offer of compromise is accepted, no confirmation of liability by that Committee will be necessary.

**o. Offer Received After Liability Upheld by PMC COWC of jurisdiction.** Offers of compromise after liability has been established will be processed as any other offer of compromise on an established debt.

**p. Additional Policies.**

1. Finance activity is authorized to negotiate compromise offers, except that Regional Counsel may conduct preliminary negotiations when he/she is approached with an initial compromise offer

2. All acceptances of compromise offers are conditioned upon prompt receipt of payment.

3. For the purpose of refunds, the liability amount will be the lesser of

i. the original amount shown in the Notice of Indebtedness or

ii. the original amount of liability as reduced by agreed upon changes in the facts of the case as established at the prehearing conference or hearing.

The compromise agreement should always contain a provision to the effect that refunds will only be made when collections from the school and from students combined exceed the original liability amount - not the compromise amount.

**q. Reporting Requirements.** Effective October 31, 2017 for FY2017, each RPO will submit an annual report of school liability activity. This report is for the prior fiscal year and should report from October 1 to September 30 of the prior year. This report will be due in Education Service by October 31 annually. It is important for the accounts receivable record to be included in this report for all schools so Education Service can better monitor the status of these cases.

1**. Status of Cases**

i****. Compliance Surveys.** Indicate the names of those schools which in the past year have had compliance surveys from which significant overpayments have (or will) result. Also, state the estimated overpayment for each school, if known.**

ii.**Education Officer's Findings.** Report the Education Officer’s findings regarding potential liability for those schools in which, during the last year, compliance surveys have pointed out significant overpayments. This report should include:

A. name of school, and

B. status (e.g., 'potential liability," "not liable," or 'undetermined").

C. date of Education Officer's findings.

NOTE: Schools should not be listed as "undetermined" on more than one report.

2**. Unworked Cases in Finance.**

i. Report the number of VA Forms 22-8804 which have not been processed. (i.e. no VA Form 24-5295 has been prepared yet).

ii. Report the number of schools represented by the VA Forms 22-8804. (Count the number of Education Officer’s covering memos.)

3**. Schools Notified of Potential Liability.** Report the name and dollar liability amount for each school to which the Notice of Indebtedness (NOI) has been sent. This is a cumulative category. Add schools and amounts as these NOIs are sent. Subtract amounts and/or remove schools as they pass into successive categories. No school should remain in this category once it has received a Committee school liability decision. If a school has been in this category for over one year from the date the NOI was sent, an explanation for the delay should be included.

4**. Liability Upheld but Not Collected.** Report the names and dollar liability amounts of all schools for which liability has been upheld by an RPO Committee or by Education Service. Remove schools and reduce amounts as collections, re-computations, and terminations are made and when Education Service reverses a liability decision on appeal. Include in this category cases with appeals pending.

5**. Liability Not Upheld (Cumulative).**

i**.  RPO Level.** Report the name and dollar liability amount of each school for which liability was NOT upheld by the RPO school liability panels since October 1, of this fiscal year.

ii. **Education Service Level.** Report the same information for cases where liability was not upheld by the School Liability Appeals Board.

6**. Recoveries.**

i**. School Liability Cases.** Show the name of each school and amount recovered. This category should contain only those cases where recoveries were made under [38 U.S.C. 1785](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:1785 edition:prelim)), the school liability section of the law ([CFR 21.4009](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14009)).

ii**. Recoveries other than School Liability.** Report the names of schools and amounts collected which are not the results of the school liability provision of the law. This category includes false claims settlements, PREP collections and collections from fraud litigation. Indicate type of collection for each school.

7**. Compromises (Cumulative).** Report the name of each school and the amount actually recovered. Report only amounts recovered for this fiscal year. Schools and amounts in this category should also be reflected in category 6a or 6b (If a compromise offer is pending acceptance, report the case in category 3 or 4 as appropriate.)

8**. Terminations (Cumulative).**

i. **Terminations by the Education Division.** Report the names of schools and amounts terminated for the fiscal year by the Education Officer.

ii. **Terminations by SSD.** Report names of schools and amounts terminated by SSDS or at the direction of Education Service for the fiscal year.

9. **Refunds (Cumulative).** Names of schools and amounts of refunds made to schools. For a school to appear in this category, it must also appear in category 6a.

10**. Completion of Report.** The name, title and phone number of person who may be contacted regarding this report.

**NOTE 1:** No local form or form letter will be developed for this report.

**NOTE 2:** For items 5-9 show the names of each school and dollar amounts on the first report. For subsequent reports, show only the total cumulative dollar amounts with the number of schools represented and only report specific school names and amounts which account for changes in that total.