# Unsatisfactory Attendance, Progress, or Conduct

**Part 4: Chapter 5 - Unsatisfactory Attendance, Progress, or Conduct**

[5.01 General](#501)  
[5.02 Responsibilities of Schools](#502)  
[5.03 VA Responsibilities](#503)  
[5.04 Procedures for Terminating Awards](#504)  
[5.05 Requests to Reenter Training](#505)

 

**5.01  GENERAL**

---

**DEFINITIONS.**[CFR 21.4277](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=889b14fd7b98647b34b8c5fa05bd8203&mc=true&node=se38.2.21_14277&rgn=div8) requires the discontinuance of educational benefits paid to a student when VA finds the student's attendance, progress, or conduct is unsatisfactory according to the regularly prescribed standards and practices of the educational institution.

**a.  Satisfactory Pursuit of Program***.* Entitlement to benefits for a program of education is subject to the requirement that the student, having commenced the pursuit of such program, continues to maintain satisfactory progress. If the student does not maintain satisfactory progress, educational benefits will be discontinued by the Department of Veterans Affairs. Progress is unsatisfactory if the student does not satisfactorily progress according to the regularly prescribed standards and practices of the institution he or she is attending.

**b**.** Satisfactory Conduct***.* Entitlement to a program of education is subject to the requirement that the student, having commenced the pursuit of such program, continues to maintain satisfactory conduct in accordance with the regularly prescribed standards and practices of the institution in which he or she is enrolled. If the student will no longer be retained as a student or will not be readmitted as a student by the institution in which he or she is enrolled, educational benefits will be discontinued, unless further development establishes that the action of the school is of a retaliatory nature.

**c**.**** **Satisfactory Attendance**. Entitlement to benefits for a program of education is subject to the requirement that the student, having commenced the pursuit of such program, continues to maintain satisfactory attendance in accordance with the regularly prescribed standards and practices of the institution in which he or she is enrolled. If the student will no longer be retained as a student or will not be readmitted as a student by the institution in which he or she is enrolled, educational benefits will be discontinued.

**5.02  RESPONSIBILITIES OF SCHOOLS**

---

**a.** **Required Standards of Attendance, Progress, and Conduct.** Schools are required to have, and enforce, standards of progress and conduct. See [M22-4, Part 9, Chapter 2](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073740/Part-9-Chapter-2-Review-of-Approvals-Overview).

**b.  Notify VA of** **Academic Probation.  ELIMINATED, effective January 21, 2020,** School Certifying Officials (SCOs) will no longer need to report academic probation to VA, the Regional Processing Offices (RPOs) will no longer need to report the information to Education Service, and Veterans Claims Examiners (VCEs) will no longer need to send the letter to students.

**c.**  **Notifying VA of Failure to Maintain Standards of Attendance, Progress, or Conduct.**  When a student has failed to maintain the prescribed standard of attendance, progress, or conduct, the school must notify VA so that VA can discontinue benefit payments in accordance with the law. Schools should notify VA within 30 days when they have determined the student has failed to maintain the prescribed standards.  This will be evaluated during school survey visits.

If a student's progress or conduct becomes unsatisfactory, the termination date assigned by the school will be the last day of the term, or other evaluation period in which the student's progress or conduct became unsatisfactory. In situations involving unsatisfactory attendance, benefits will be discontinued based on the student's last date of attendance as reported by the school.

**5.03** **VA RESPONSIBILITIES.**

---

The law requires that educational assistance benefits to Veterans and other eligible persons be discontinued when the student ceases to make satisfactory progress toward completion of their training objective. 

G[o to Top](##Top)

**5.04  PROCEDURES FOR TERMINATING AWARDS.**

---

**a**.  **Terminating the Award.** Upon receipt of a VA Form 22-1999b which reports unsatisfactory attendance, progress, or conduct, the VCE will promptly discontinue further payment if the student's award extends beyond the termination date for benefits as reported by the school or training establishment.

(1)  For non-chapter 33 benefits, process a stop payment transaction (or amended award) using ending reason code 62 for unsatisfactory progress, conduct, or attendance on a supplemental end product. The effective date for termination will be the day after the date the educational institution discontinues the student's enrollment. (i.e. No-pay date)

(2)  For chapter 33 benefits, open the appropriate work product, and under “add amendment”, enter the effective date and select the reason “Unsat” in LTS.

**NOTE:** For all education benefits, the use of the 6-credit exclusion is not appropriate when the school reports Unsatisfactory Progress.

**b**.  **Notification of Terminations for Unsatisfactory Attendance, Conduct, or Progress.** Whenever a claimant is terminated for unsatisfactory attendance, conduct, or progress, the VCE should allow the Benefits Delivery Network (BDN) or Long Term Solution (LTS) letter to be issued for the appropriate benefit program.  BDN/LTS will release the appropriate letter as long as the correct end reason code (effective date reason) is used.  If the VCE is unsure if the BDN/LTS letter is appropriate, a locally produced (SR-3) letter is acceptable.

**5.05  REQUESTS TO REENTER TRAINING.**

---

**Conditions for Resuming Benefits.** After VA has discontinued education benefits because of a student's unsatisfactory attendance, progress, or conduct, education benefits may be resumed when a school, either the same school or a new one, certifies a beneficiary’s enrollment to VA.

VA is reliant upon the enrollment and acceptance processes of approved schools to evaluate and place students in their perspective programs.  The new school's certification of a student's enrollment on VA Form 22-1999, will serve as sufficient evidence that the new program is suitable, and VA may resume educational benefits.

**NOTE:** The Supplemental Information for Change of Program or Place of Training (VA Form 22-1995) or Re-enrollment after Unsatisfactory Progress or Conduct (VA Form 22-8873) is no longer required.