# Chapter 33 Sub-Chapter 4.1 Overview

**Chapter 33 Sub-Chapter 1. Overview**

**a. General**

The Post-9/11 GI Bill provides financial support for education and housing to individuals with at least 90 days on active duty after September 10, 2001, or at least 30 days if discharged for a service-connected disability. This includes certain types of active duty served as a member of the Uniformed Services or because of a call up or mobilization to active duty from a reserve component (National Guard or Selected Reserve) under certain sections of Title 10 or Title 32. 

**b.** **Eligibility**

Eligible service members, veterans, and dependents attending approved education and training programs are entitled to the following monetary benefits:

* Tuition and fees are paid directly to the school for all students.
* Public school tuition and fees may be paid up to the full amount of in-state charges.
* Private or foreign schools tuition and fees are capped at an annual maximum per academic year.
* The Yellow Ribbon Program pays benefits toward the additional costs of qualifying individuals attending expensive private schools, or those with out-of-state charges.
* An annual books and supplies stipend of up to $1,000 will be paid proportionately based on benefit level and enrollment information.
* Eligible veterans and dependents are paid a monthly housing allowance (MHA) based on the military’s Basic Allowance for Housing (BAH) rate for an E-5 with dependents if enrolled at more than one-half time.
* Eligible individuals can be paid benefits for a Chapter 30 (Montgomery GI Bill- Active Duty) or Chapter 1606 (Montgomery GI Bill- Selected Reserve) kicker, if that benefit was relinquished to establish eligibility under the Post-9/11 GI Bill.
* A one-time rural relocation benefit payment is also available for eligible individuals.

**c. Entitlement and Time Limit**

The Post-9/11 GI Bill provides up to 36 months of education benefits. Generally, benefits are payable for 15 years following a service member’s release from active duty.

**d. Benefits**

Benefit payments are calculated based on the amount of qualifying active duty service an individual has after September 10, 2001. The following chart outlines the breakdown of benefits based on the amount of service.

| **QUALIFYING POST-9/11 SERVICE** | **NUMBER OF DAYS** | **PERCENTAGE OF MAXIMUM BENEFIT PAYABLE** |
| --- | --- | --- |
| At least 36 months | If aggregate service *(including* entry training) is 1095 days or more days | 100% |
| At least 30 continuous days on active duty and must be discharged due to service-connected disability |  | 100% |
| 30 months  (At least 30 months, but less than 36 months) | If aggregate service *(including* entry training) is from 910 to 1094 days | 90% |
| 24 months  (At least 24 months, but less than 30 months) | If aggregate service *(including* entry training) is from 730 to 909 days | \*80% (asterisk for percentage for initial skills and training) |
| 18 months  (At least 18 months, but less than 24 months) | If aggregate service *(excluding* entry training) is from 545 to 729 days | \*70% (asterisk for percentage for initial skills and training) |
| 12 months  (At least 12 months, but less than 18 months) | If aggregate service *(excluding* entry training) is from 365 to 544 days | 60% |
| 6 months  (At least 6 months, but less than 12 months) | If aggregate service *(excluding* entry training) is from 180 to 364 days | 50% |
| 90 days  (At least 90 days, but less than 6 months) | If aggregate service *(excluding* entry training) is from 90 to 179 days | 40% |

**e. The 70/80 rule is as follows:**

If the aggregate service including training is at least 24 months (730-909 days) but less than 30 months (910-1094 days) AND the aggregate service excluding training is at least 18 months (545 to 729 days) but less than 24 months, the individual will be deemed eligible at the 70% benefit level.

***Sources***

[PL 110-252](https://www.congress.gov/110/plaws/publ252/PLAW-110publ252.pdf), PL 111-377, Chapter 33 Post-9/11 Educational Assistance, Subchapter II Educational Assistance, Section 3313. Educational assistance: amount; payment

 

Last updated:  October 6, 2015

      [Go To Top](#top)