# Part 9: Chapter 1 - General

**Part 9: Chapter 1 - General**

[**Subchapter 1**](#Si)**. Role of the Education Liaison Representative**  
[1.01  Designations and Responsibilities of the Education Liaison Representative](#101)  
[1.02  Jurisdiction Over Program Approvals](#102)  
[1.03  Liaison With State Approving Agencies](#103)  
[1.04  Liaison With Schools and Job Training Establishments](#104)  
[1.05  Liaison With Regional Processing Office Personnel](#105)  
[1.06  Liaison With Regional Office Personnel](#106)  
[1.07  Liaison With Other State and Federal Agencies and Organizations](#107)  
  
**[Subchapter 2](#SII). State Approving Agencies**  
[1.08  General](#108)  
[1.09  Inspections and Approvals](#109)  
[1.10  Reimbursement Contracts With State Approving Agencies](#110)  
[1.11  Reviews of Contract Proposals by Education Liaison Representatives](#111)  
[1.12  Invoice Processing](#112)  
[1.13  Quarterly Report of Activities](#113)  
[1.14  State Approving Agency Performance Evaluation Process](#114)  
  
**Figures**  
[1.01  State Approving Agency Contract Number:  First Two Digits — Fiscal Year](#f101)  
[1.02  State Approving Agency Contract Number:  Second Two Digits — State Approving Agency Numeric Designation](#f102)  
[1.03  Administrative Cost Formula](#f103)  
[1.04  Completed Standard Form 1034, Public Voucher for Purchases and Services Other Than Personal](#f104)  
  
**Tables**  
[1.01  SAA Administrative Allowance](#t101)

  

**SUBCHAPTER I.  ROLE OF THE EDUCATION LIAISON REPRESENTATIVE**

**1.01  DESIGNATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE EDUCATION LIAISON REPRESENTATIVE**

---

**a**.  **Designations**  The ESUs (Education Services Units) at RO’s (Regional Offices) are under the jurisdiction of the CELO (Chief Education Liaison Officer) at the RPO (Regional Processing Office) of jurisdiction.  They are responsible for education liaison activities.  The subsequent chapters in this part provide detailed descriptions of these activities.

1.  CELOs must designate ELRs (Education Liaison Representatives) to administer the responsibilities of the ESUs.

2.  CELOs must report changes of ELRs to the Education Service, CO Operations (223B) , at 202-273-7156.  Even if CELOs informally report changes to CO Operations, they must formally notify the Director, Education Service (22) either by mail or by [E-Mail](mailto:VAVBAWAS/CO/223B?subject=Part%209%3A%20Chapter%201%20-%20General).

**b.  References**  The primary duties of ELRs involve program approval activities.  These activities are a principal factor in processing awards of educational assistance benefits to veteran students.  The proper administration of these responsibilities and duties constitute a critical aspect of overall education program effectiveness and productivity.  For successful performance of these assignments, ELRs must be familiar with the requirements of the following references:

1.  The provisions of 38 U.S.C. Chapters 30, 32, 35, and 36, 10 U.S.C. Chapter 1606, and sections 901 and 903 of [Public Law 96-354](http://uscode.house.gov/statviewer.htm?volume=94&page=1165).

2. The duties and responsibilities of the SAA (State Approving Agency) as provided in the annual contract.

3.  Approval criteria for all types of training.

4.  The Service Members Occupational Conversion and Training Act of 1992.  (See M22-5 for additional information.)

5.  Applicable federal and state standards for apprenticeship training.

6.  Federal Aviation Regulations for flight training.

7.  VA procedures relating to program approvals.

8.  VA regulations pertaining to 38 U.S.C. Chapters 30, 32, 35, and 36, 10 U.S.C. Chapter 1606, and sections 901 and 903 of [Public Law 96-354](http://uscode.house.gov/statviewer.htm?volume=94&page=1165).

9.  Applicable equal opportunity legislation, executive orders, and implementing regulations, to include:

i.  Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 as amended ([42 U.S.C. 2000d-2000d-6](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:42 section:2000d edition:prelim))); title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 as amended ([20 U.S.C. 1681-1686](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:20 section:1681 edition:prelim))); section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 as amended  ([29 U.S.C. 794](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:29 section:794 edition:prelim))); the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, as amended ([42 U.S.C. 6101](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:42 section:6101 edition:prelim)), et. seq.); and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.

ii.  Executive Orders 11764 and 11914.

iii.  [Title 28, CFR, parts 42F and 50.3; title 45 CFR, part 90](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=6928712d691688a70fd910432321e018&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt28.1.42&r=PART).

ivi.  [M27-1, part III, chapters 13 through 15](http://vbaw.vba.va.gov/bl/21/publicat/Manuals/Part3/index.htm#ch13).

10.  VA regulations on equal opportunity.

**c.  Responsibilities.**  ELRs have a wide range of responsibilities in support of education benefits programs cited in [paragraph 1.01b(8)](#101b8).  These responsibilities include, but are not limited to:

1.  Receiving, reviewing, and taking appropriate actions on all approval notices submitted by SAAs.

2.  Maintaining close working relationships with SAAs to oversee proper completion of the reimbursement contract provisions.

3.  Maintaining close working relationships with officials at schools and job training establishments and promptly informing them of changes in VA policies and procedures.

4.  Disseminating approval information to all concerned elements within ROs and RPOs.

5.  Approving education and job training programs in those instances where SAAs are unable to approve programs or have declined jurisdiction of these programs.

6.  Scheduling and monitoring the completion of required compliance surveys.

7.  Scheduling and conducting liaison visits with schools and job training establishments or other government offices either regularly or on an "as needed" basis.

8.  Maintaining appropriate working relationships with state agencies involved in any way with the education or training of veterans.  This may include the state departments of labor, employment security, veterans affairs, etc.

9.  Maintaining close working relationships with veteran service organizations on education related matters and ensure that they are promptly notified of changes in VA policies and procedures.

[Back to Top](#TOP)

**1.02  JURISDICTION OVER PROGRAM APPROVALS**

---

**a.  SAA Approvals.**  SAAs are responsible for approving programs offered by schools and job training establishments located within the boundaries of their state.  The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the District of Columbia are "states" for approval purposes.  SAAs are also responsible for approving college level programs offered in foreign countries by schools located within their jurisdictions.

**b.  RO Approvals.**  ROs serve as the approving agency for states under one of three conditions:

1.  The state fails or declines to create or designate an SAA.

2.  The Education Service determines that the SAA cannot adequately fulfill the requirements for program approvals.

3.  When required or authorized by law.

**c.  Education Service Approvals.**  The Director, Education Service, acting on behalf of the Secretary, is responsible for reviewing and approving programs of education or training under the following conditions:

1.  Programs offered by schools located in any foreign country except the Republic of the Philippines.

2.  Programs offered by branches or extensions of domestic schools or by any other schools located in the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of Palau, and all U.S. territorial possessions where there are no functioning SAAs.

3.  Programs offered by federal agencies or departments.  This includes flight training given by military flying clubs, i.e. aero clubs.

4.  National apprenticeship programs operating in more than one state and training establishments that are carriers directly engaged in interstate commerce.

**d.  Manila RO Approvals.**  The Manila RO is responsible for the approval of programs offered by schools in the Philippines.

**e. San Juan RO Approvals.**  The San Juan RO is responsible for the approval of programs offered by schools and job training establishments in the U.S. Virgin Islands.

[Back to Top](#TOP)

**1.03  LIAISON WITH STATE APPROVING AGENCIES**

---

**a.  Relationship between VA and SAAs.**  Cooperation between ELRs and SAAs is essential for the effective and efficient administration of VA education benefits.  A free flowing exchange of information between ELRs and SAAs helps to ensure proper enforcement of approval standards, enrollment restrictions, and the prompt payment of benefits.

**b.  States With More Than One RO.**  The following ROs are the primary liaison offices for their respective states:

STATE                                   PRIMARY LIAISON OFFICE

California                                               San Diego

New York                                               Buffalo

Pennsylvania                                        Philadelphia

Texas                                                      Waco

1.  The primary ROs:

i.  Will distribute copies of regulations, circulars, and any other pertinent information regarding issues involving approval criteria and reporting requirements to the SAA(s).

ii.  Are responsible for liaison activities with other state agencies and dissemination of information regarding state agencies to other ROs in the state.

iii.  Are responsible for dissemination of information to schools within their area of jurisdiction in the state.

2.  The secondary ROs are responsible for dissemination of information to schools within their area of jurisdiction in the state.

*NOTE:  In California, the San Diego RO is responsible for the dissemination of information to all schools and job training establishments in the state.*

[Back to Top](#TOP)

**1.04  LIAISON WITH SCHOOLS AND JOB TRAINING ESTABLISHMENTS**

---

**a.  General.**  ELRs must maintain close contact with officials of schools and job training establishments approved for VA benefits.  ELRs should pay careful attention to facilities with large numbers of students or trainees.  ELRs must provide officials of all approved schools and job training establishments with their name, address, telephone number and E-Mail address, and encourage them to contact the ELRs with any questions regarding VA requirements and procedures.

**b.  Communications.**  ELRs must maintain open lines of communication.  Telephone contacts, bulletins, letters, group meetings, or individual liaison visits are all excellent means of accomplishing this.  ELRs must ensure the timely issuance of accurate enrollment certifications, notices of reduction and termination, periodic certifications, and other required reports.

[Back to Top](#TOP)

**1.05  LIAISON WITH REGIONAL PROCESSING OFFICE PERSONNEL**

---

**a.  General.**  The CELO at each RPO is the contact point for ELRs at ROs within the RPO's jurisdiction when dealing with the RPO's Adjudication Division or Finance activity.  When  RO ELRs need to refer issues to the RPO's Adjudication Division or Finance activity, ELRs should call or send an E-Mail message to the CELO at the RPO.  The CELO at the RPO should review the information received from ELR’s and ensure that it is referred to the proper activity for the necessary action.

**b.  Returning Calls or E-Mail Messages.**  ELRs at ROs should return calls or E-Mails directly to RPO employees who called or sent the E-Mail.  Since most of these calls or E-Mails deal with specific claims for education benefits, it is faster for ELRs at ROs to reply directly to the caller or sender and avoid involving the CELO.

[Back to Top](#TOP)

**1.06  LIAISON WITH REGIONAL OFFICE PERSONNEL**

---

**a.  General.**  Oversight and Accountability Division staff should assist RO personnel in dealing with approval and compliance education benefit inquiries.

**b.  Veteran Readiness and Employment.**Oversight and Accountability Division staff will assist VR&E employees with maintaining approval information on CH31 facilities. Staff must use WEAMS (Web Enabled Approval Management System) to maintain approval information on Chapter 31 only facilities. See paragraph 5.09 for information on Chapter 31 approvals and chapter 6 on maintaining approvals in WEAMS. Submission of approval applications and associated documents are managed within the Salesforce approval module reference Part 9, 8.01

[Back to Top](#TOP)

**1.07  LIAISON WITH OTHER STATE AND FEDERAL AGENCIES AND ORGANIZATIONS**

---

**a.  Other Agencies.**  ELRs must maintain liaison with agencies and organizations at the state and local levels that affect the education benefit programs.  ELRs must identify areas where such agencies can provide information useful to the administration of VA benefits.  In this regard, ELRs should become familiar with the state licensing and degree granting requirements.  Pertinent agencies may include:

1.  The state departments of education and any other state agencies responsible for the licensing of schools and job training establishments.

2.  The state boards of cosmetology and barbering.

3.  Associations of schools located within the state.

4.  The state labor departments or other organization responsible for job training.

5.  The closest Federal Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training.

6.  The local Flight Standards District Office and the Flight Standards Division, Operating Branch, at the Federal Aviation Administration Regional Offices.

**b.  Other Agency Regulations.**  ELRs must be familiar with the rules and regulations of federal and state agencies that affect the payment of VA education benefits.  ELRs should establish procedures with appropriate personnel within these agencies to ensure prompt notification of any changes that affect payment of VA education benefits.

[Back to Top](#TOP)

**SUBCHAPTER II.  STATE APPROVING AGENCIES**

**1.08  GENERAL**

---

**a.  Background.**  Receipt of VA education benefits is dependent upon participation or enrollment in approved educational, vocational, or job training programs.  The approval of these various programs is the responsibility of the SAAs in the state in which the schools or job training establishments are located.  There are limited exceptions that are described in [paragraph 1.02b](#102b) and [c](#102c).  Statutory authority for the establishment and designations of SAAs is in 38 U.S.C. Chapter 36.  State Governors may designate one or more state office(s) to act as SAAs.  For example, a state could have one agency for approval of IHLs (Institutions of Higher Learning), another agency for NCD (Non-college Degree) programs, and a third agency for OJT (On-The-Job) training and apprenticeship programs.

**b.  Responsibilities.**  SAAs are responsible for the following:

1.  Determining the qualifications of schools and job training establishments to offer instruction under 38 U.S.C., Chapters 30, 32, 35, 36, and  10 U.S.C. Chapter 1606.

2.  Approving programs of education and training for veterans, servicepersons, and other eligible persons.

3.  Supervising approved schools and job training establishments.

4.  Furnishing other services as requested by VA to ensure compliance with the requirements of title 38, U.S.C.

5.  Withdrawing the approvals of programs that fail to maintain the standards and conditions upon which approval was granted.

[Back to Top](#TOP)

**1.09  INSPECTIONS AND APPROVALS**

---

**a.  Program Approvals.**  SAAs must evaluate Educational and Training Institutions (ETI) campuses to determine whether or not their programs meet the requirements of title 38 U.S.C. Chapter 36. 

1. The approval jurisdictions of SAAs extend only to those programs cited in [**paragraph 1.08b(1)**](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000075637/Part%209:%20Chapter%201%20-%20General#108b1).
2. SAAs are not responsible for the approval of programs under Title 38 U.S. Code Chapter 31, Veteran Readiness & Employment, VET TEC, and section 901 (Education Assistance Test Program) of [**Public Law 96-342**](http://uscode.house.gov/statviewer.htm?volume=94&page=1114).
3. Extension campuses should be identified in accordance with 38 CFR 21.4266, PL 115-48 Colmery Act Section 107 requirements.

**b.  SAA Jurisdiction.** 

1. SAAs have jurisdiction over Educational and Training Institutions (ETI) operating within the borders of their respective state.
2. If an extension or branch campus is located in a state that does not also have a main campus, the SAA with jurisdiction in this state may approve the programs at these extensions or branch campuses. The SAA should coordinate approval actions with the SAA who has jurisdiction of the main campus.
3. The SAA with jurisdiction of the United States based Institution of Higher Learning main campus is responsible for the approval of overseas campuses.

**c. Approval Documentation.**  SAAs will require any ETI desiring to seek approval of programs to be pursued by Veterans and eligible persons to submit an application for approval.  SAAs are responsible for developing their applications.  After determining whether or not a program meets the requirements for approval, SAAs must notify the ETI of the results of their findings.  In addition, SAAs must provide written notification of each amendment, modification, or withdrawal of any approval using current established paperless operating procedures (Salesforce).  SAAs must send notices of withdrawal and suspensions of approval sent to ETI by registered or certified letters with return receipt requested.  The only exception is when SAAs determine that the ETI is no longer in business and all mail is being returned as undeliverable.  All approval notices must contain the items identified in Part 9, Chapter 2.18.

**d.  Specific Requirements.**  In addition, SAAs will provide the specific information and documentation necessary to approve accredited and non-accredited programs; programs leading to standard college degrees; business, technical, and vocational programs leading to certificates or diplomas; correspondence courses, flight training programs, and apprenticeship and other on-the-job training programs.  Part 9, Chapter 2 contains the specific requirements for accredited and non-accredited programs.  Part 9, Chapter 3 contains the specific requirements for programs leading to standard college degrees and business, technical, and vocational programs leading to certificates or diplomas.  Part 9, Chapter 4 contains the specific requirements for correspondence courses, flight training programs, and apprenticeship and other on-the-job training programs.

[Back to Top](#TOP)

**1.10  REIMBURSEMENT CONTRACTS WITH STATE APPROVING AGENCIES**

---

**a.  Contract Negotiation.**  The NASAA's (National Association of State Approving Agencies) Contract Committee and the Director, Education Service will negotiate the reimbursement contract each year.  NASAA meets with the Education Service before the beginning of each fiscal year to negotiate the contracts for the next fiscal year.

**b.  Document Transmission.**  The Education Service will send each SAA a transmittal letter and three copies of the contract.  In the letter, the Education Service will specify the maximum dollar amount authorized for the contract and provide specific instructions for completing the contract.  SAAs must send the completed contract proposals to the RO of jurisdiction for review.

[Back to Top](#TOP)

**1.11  REVIEWS OF CONTRACT PROPOSALS BY EDUCATION LIAISON REPRESENTATIVES**

---

**a.  Document Review.**  ELRs must review SAA contract proposals for completeness.

1.  The packages must include:

i.  Three copies of the contract.

ii.  Current state wage schedules with the wages of the positions listed in Article IX of the contract.  SAAs must highlight or underline the salaries of contract personnel.

iii.  Current fringe benefit schedules with the amount of Social Security, Health Insurance, Workman's Compensation, and the percentage pertinent to each per position covered by the contract.

iv.  Copy of current state travel regulations, if not previously submitted to the Education Service.

v.  The SAA's Plan of Operations.  See [paragraph 1.14e](#114e).

2.  ELRs must ensure that:

i.  The contract number is correct.  The current contract numbering system started in FY (Fiscal Year) 1990 and consists of a four digit number.

A.  The first two digits designate the current FY.  The first number used was 30.  The number increases by one for each subsequent FY.  Figure 1.01 shows the two digit combinations for each FY for a 20 year period beginning with FY 1998.  This systemic progression will continue indefinitely.

| **Fiscal Year** | **No.** | **Fiscal Year** | **No.** | **Fiscal Year** | **No.** | **Fiscal Year** | **No.** |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1998 | 38 | 2002 | 42 | 2006 | 46 | 2010 | 50 |
| 1999 | 39 | 2003 | 43 | 2007 | 47 | 2011 | 51 |
| 2000 | 40 | 2004 | 44 | 2008 | 48 | 2012 | 52 |
| 2001 | 41 | 2005 | 45 | 2009 | 49 | 2013 | 53 |

**Figure 1.01.  State Approving Agency Contract Number:  First Two Digits – Fiscal Year**

B.  The second two digits identify the SAA according to the designation illustrated in figure 1.02.

| **SAA** | **No.** | **SAA** | **No.** | **SAA** | **No.** | **SAA** | **No.** |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Alabama SDE | 00 | Indiana CPPE | 73 | Nebraska DE | 36 | Rhode Island OHE | 53 |
| Alaska CPE | 01 | Indiana DVA | 17 | Nevada CPE | 76 | South Carolina CHE | 54 |
| Arizona VSC | 83 | Iowa SDE | 18 | New Hampshire PE | 86 | South Dakota DMVA | 81 |
| Arkansas De | 05 | Kansas CVA | 19 | New Jersey DMAVA | 39 | Tennessee HEC | 56 |
| California CPPVE | 06 | Kentucky SBE | 20 | New Mexico OMA | 40 | Texas HEC | 57 |
| California DIR | 07 | Louisiana DE | 21 | New York SED | 41 | Utah BR | 59 |
| Colorado SBCC/DE | 08 | Louisiana DOL | 22 | North Carolina DOL | 44 | Vermont SDE | 60 |
| Connecticut DHE | 09 | Maine DECS | 23 | North Carolina SAA | 43 | Virginia DE | 62 |
| DC ELC | 80 | Maryland HEC | 24 | North Dakota SAA | 45 | Washington HEC | 69 |
| Delaware SBE | 74 | Massachusetts BRHE | 25 | Ohio DE | 46 | Washington WTECB | 63 |
| Florida DVA | 11 | Michigan DE | 27 | Oklahoma SAA | 48 | West Virginia HECO | 65 |
| Georgia SDVS | 13 | Minnesota BE | 28 | Oregon BLI | 50 | Wisconsin DILHR | 67 |
| Hawaii DLIR | 14 | Minnesota DLI | 29 | Oregon DE | 49 | Wisconsin EAB | 66 |
| Hawaii SPEC | 79 | Mississippi SVAB | 31 | Pennsylvania DE | 51 | Wyoming DE | 68 |
| Idaho DE | 15 | Missouri SBE | 32 | Puerto Rico | 52 |  |  |
| Illinois DVA | 16 | Montana OPI | 33 |  |  |  |  |

**Figure 1.02.  State Approving Agency Contract Number:  Second Two Digits – State Approving Agency  Numeric Designation**

C.  As an example, the number for the Alabama SDE (State Department of Education) contract for FY 1996 is 3600, i.e. "36" designating FY 1996 and "00" designating Alabama SDE.

ii.  The math in Article IX of the contract is correct.

iii.  The address in Article IX is correct.

iv.  All contract certifications are complete.

v.  Article XIV of the contract contains the name of the State, signature, and title of the contract signatory.

*NOTE:  Governors appoint contract signatories authorized to commit the agencies or departments to legally binding contracts.  SAAs submit the names of these persons to the ROs who then send them to the Education Service (223B).  ELRs must promptly send changes in the contract signatories to the Education Service (223B) and not wait until they receive the contracts.*

vi.  Each form contains an original signature of the contract signatory.

**b.  Document Submission.**  After review, ELRs must submit the reimbursement contracts and the plans of operations to the Education Service (223B) along with letters of recommendation for acceptance or required changes.

**c.  Document Completion.**  The Education Service will return two copies of the executed contract to ROs.  ELRs will keep one copy and send the other to the SAA.

[Back to Top](#TOP)

**1.12  INVOICE PROCESSING**

---

**a.  Payment Transactions.**  Beginning in FY 1997, Finance personnel began to change from using the BDN (Benefits Delivery Network) to FMS (Financial Management System) to enter the transactions necessary to disburse reimbursement payments to SAAs.

**b.  Reimbursement Invoice.**  SAAs will request reimbursement on a monthly or quarterly basis by preparing an invoice and sending it with supporting documentation to ELRs.  SAAs will submit the invoice to ROs as soon as possible after the month or quarter that the invoice covers.

**c.  Invoice Standards.** There is no prescribed format for either the invoice or for any supporting documents.  Invoices and their supporting documents must conform with the requirements contained in Article VIII of the SAA's reimbursement contract.

1.  SAAs must submit the invoice under the contract number and must show only the total amount of expenses claimed under the contract.  Invoices must claim reimbursement for expenditures that have not been properly claimed under this or any other contract.

2.  SAAs should submit invoices and supporting documentation as soon as possible following the period for which they are requesting reimbursement.  A delay in payment may result if invoices are not received in a timely manner.  Such a delay could, in turn, delay the processing of subsequent claims, or claims for supplemental contract amounts, which could be subject to the availability of funds.

3.  Invoices must be accompanied by detailed supporting documentation.  This will include for each individual:

i.  Name.

ii.  Position or title.

iii.  Salary rate.

iv.  Amount paid for travel.

v.  The period(s) covered for these expenditures.

4.  Travel expenses must be documented as required by [38 CFR 21.4153](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=84204e4972cb78fa08236b8a8e979334&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14153).  SAAs must include copies of state travel vouchers showing travel for VA contract purposes and indicating the cost, destination, and purpose of travel for all travel claimed.  Travel claimed for visits to schools and job training establishments must be supported by copies of the visit reports.

5.  Where travel is conducted by employees performing both VA related functions and other job related functions, claims for reimbursement must include a statement of hourly time distribution for each set of functions.

**d.  ELR Actions.** Upon receipt and date stamping of the invoice, ELRs must review the invoices.  ELRs must complete their reviews within 7 days of receipt.  ELRs must confirm that the amount of the reimbursement claimed by the SAA is appropriate.  ELRs must certify that:

1.  Invoices are mathematically correct.

2.  SAAs used the appropriate salary and travel rates.

3.  Statements of time distribution are provided for employees who are performing work other than that specified in the contract.  The SAA reimbursement contract does not specify a form for this.  Rather, it requires that reimbursement of both time and travel for state employees who provide services to VA under the contract and to the state for other purposes must be supported by appropriate documentation.  The method used to allocate time and travel in these cases should produce an equitable distribution of time, effort, and travel.  Reimbursement must not exceed the *pro rata* part of the employee's salary and travel expenditures as supported by these time distribution records.

4.  Reports for each inspection or supervisory visits are included.  If travel is indicated and is not for inspection or supervisory purposes, a statement is required which explains the reason for the travel.

5.  Travel costs are substantiated by either a travel itinerary, a State travel voucher, or both.  These must clearly indicate the cost, destination, and purpose of the travel.

6.  The amount claimed from the beginning of the fiscal year through the end of the month or quarter for salaries, fringe benefits, and travel does not exceed the amounts in article IX of the reimbursement contract.

7.  The travel is consistent with the Plan of Operation.

8.  An appropriate state official has signed and dated the invoice.

**e.  Administrative Expense Allowance.** After validating the correctness of invoices, ELRs must determine the administrative expense allowance due the SAA.  The formula in [38 CFR 21.4153(a)(3)(i)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=84204e4972cb78fa08236b8a8e979334&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14153) is the basis for the calculation of the administrative allowance.  Figure 1.03 contains the formula.  Only salary and fringe benefits are applied in this formula.  Travel expenses are **not** a factor.

Appendix A contains the precise administrative allowance based on a more closely defined range of salary and fringe benefit amounts.

**f.  SAA Invoice-No Exceptions.** If there are no exceptions, ELRs must certify the SAAs invoice and prepare an original and two copies of Standard Form 1034, Public Voucher for Purchase and Service Other Than Personal.  (See figure 1.04 for an example of a completed SF 1034.)  ELRs must submit the original SF 1034 to the RO's Finance activity for processing.  The Finance activities must, in turn, complete BDN or FMS processing and provide copies of the payment transaction screens to ELRs.  ELRs must send one copy of the voucher package, with a copy of the BDN or FMS payment transaction screen attached, to the Education Service  (223B.)  ELRs must retain the other copy of the voucher package also with a copy of the BDN or FMS payment transaction screen in an SAA voucher file.

| **Total Salary Cost Payable** | **Allowable Administrative Expense** |
| --- | --- |
| $5,000 or less | $693 |
| Over $5,000 but not exceeding $10,000 | $1,247 |
| Over $10,000 but not exceeding $35,000 | $1,247 for the first $10,000 plus $1,555 for each additional $5,000 or fraction thereof |
| Over $35,000 but not exceeding $40,000 | $7,548 |
| Over $40,000 but not exceeding $75,000 | $7,548 for the first $40,000 plus $999 for each additional $5,000 or fraction thereof |
| Over $75,000 but not exceeding $80,000 | $14,969 |
| Over $80,000 | $14,969 for the first $80,000 plus $872 for each additional $5,000 or fraction thereof |

**Figure 1.03.  Administrative Cost Formula**

**g.  SAA Invoice-Exceptions Noted.** If there are exceptions to the SAA's invoice, ELRs must contact the SAA by telephone for clarification.  If ELRs and SAAs cannot reach agreement on the exception within 7 days of receipt of the invoice, ELRs must notify SAAs of the exceptions taken and follow up in writing ([48 CFR 52.232-25](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=3e5bc3cd1f66f3cac996bb9054a4026a&mc=true&node=se48.2.52_1232_625&rgn=div8)).  Letters should clearly explain the reasons for the exceptions and include a statement informing the SAA that they may obtain a final decision on the issue by writing to the Director, Education Service (223B).  ELRs must prepare vouchers for payment as described in the sub[paragraph f](#112f) above, minus the amount in dispute.

**h.  Unsettled Dispute.** When disputes cannot be settled by agreement and a final decision under the disputes clause of the SAA's Reimbursement Contract is necessary, the Director, Education Service will make a final decision in the matter and inform the SAA ([48 CFR 52.233-1](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=3e5bc3cd1f66f3cac996bb9054a4026a&mc=true&node=se48.2.52_1233_61&rgn=div8) and [833.211](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=84204e4972cb78fa08236b8a8e979334&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se48.5.833_1211) Disputes and Appeals).

1.  Decisions must be in writing, identified as final decisions, and include a statement of the facts in sufficient detail to enable the SAA to fully understand the decision and the basis on which it was made.  Decisions must also notify the SAA of its right to file an appeal with the Board of Contract Appeals upon receipt of the final decision.  The address of the Board is:  Board of Contract Appeals (09), 810 Vermont Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20420.

2.  Policy or personal disagreements between ELRs and SAA personnel should not enter into the reimbursement process.  If reimbursement issues arise beyond the scope of the ELR's responsibilities as outlined in [paragraph 1.12d](#112d), the ELR must refer the issues to the  Director, Education Service (223B) for resolution.

**i.  Performance Evaluation.** The SAA voucher file will assist ELRs in evaluating the SAA's fiscal year operating plan.  This information can be used during the annual SAA PEP (Performance Evaluation Process.)  [Paragraph 1.14h](#114h) contains additional information on the annual evaluation.

**j.  Record Disposition.** ELRs must destroy records in accordance with RCS VB-1, part I, item no. 7-661.020.

[Back to Top](#TOP)

**1.13  QUARTERLY REPORT OF ACTIVITIES**

---

**a.  SAA Actions.**  SAAs must submit the original and one copy of VA Form 22-7398, Quarterly Report of State Approving Agency Activities, showing the number of inspection, approval, and supervisory visits.  ELRs must ensure receipt of these reports.

**b.  ELR Actions.**  ELRs must review reports for accuracy, ask SAAs to make any necessary corrections, and forward copies of the reports to the Director, Education Service (223B) within 10 work days of receipt.

[Back to Top](#TOP)

**1.14  STATE APPROVING AGENCY PERFORMANCE EVALUATION PROCESS**

---

**a.  General.** Congress enacted [Public Law 100-323](http://uscode.house.gov/statviewer.htm?volume=102&page=567) on May 19, 1988.  The law added title [38 U.S.C. section 3674A](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3674A edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3674A)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) that required annual evaluations of each SAA’s performance and included criteria for qualifications and performance of agency personnel.  The qualifications and performance standards are located within the VA/SAA Cooperative Agreement

**b.  National Training Curriculum.**  The Education Service and the National Association of State Approving Agencies (NASAA) developed the National Training Curriculum (NTC) for the training of SAA employees.  ELRs also receive a copy and should use it for reference purposes.

**c.  Prototype Employee Qualification Standards.**  NASAA and Education Service have approved prototype employee qualification standards.  Article VI of the SAA cooperative agreement lists the employee qualification standards.  The SAA's qualification standards must describe a level of qualification that equals or exceeds the standards in Article VI of the SAA Cooperative Agreement.  SAAs do not have to apply these employee qualification standards to any person employed by the SAA on May 20, 1988 (the date of enactment of the law), if that person remains in the position in which he or she was employed on that date.

**Requirements and minimum performance standards.**  The cooperative agreement addresses the terms and conditions the SAA must adhere to as well as the minimum performance targets a SAA must meet in order to be considered to be performing satisfactorily.   

**d.  Employee Qualification Standards.** The prescribed minimum qualification standards for SAA personnel are based on job function.

1.  Qualification standards for personnel approving and supervising courses offered by educational institutions are as follows: 

i.  Bachelor's Degree with five years of related experience.

ii.  Master's Degree with three years of related experience, or

iii.  Doctorate Degree with one year of related experience.

2.  Qualification standards for personnel approving and supervising courses offered by job training establishments are as follows: 

i.  Bachelor's Degree with two years of related experience, or

ii.  Bachelor's Degree equivalent in either education or related work experience or both totaling six years.

3. Qualification standards for personnel performing compliance reviews of courses offered by educational institutions and job training establishments are as follows:

i.  Bachelor's Degree with two years of related experience, or

ii.  Bachelor's Degree equivalent in either education or related work experience or both totaling six years.

Additionally, Veterans' preference in hiring shall be given in accordance with State law.

**e.  SAA Annual Performance Evaluation.** Education Service provides SAA annual rating no later than December 31 of each year.  

**f.  Key Personnel.**

1.  Agreements Officer – Notifies SAA of violations of agreement, implements actions outlined in Article XI of the Cooperative Agreement, as needed.

2.  Education Liaison Representative – monitors performance of the SAA throughout the fiscal year, meets with the SAA quarterly, provides feedback and written notification if SAA is performing less than satisfactorily, provides an end of fiscal year rating recommendation to VACO and to SAA. 

3.  VA JPRG Evaluator – assigned by Assistant Director, Oversight and Accountability. Works with National Association of State Approving Agency appointed SAA representative to provide JPRG rating recommendations to Rating Decision Official.

4.  Rating Decision Official - Deputy Director

5.  Appellate Officer - Director, Education Service –hears an SAA appeal of rating and determines if a change to a rating should be considered.  Works closely with the President of NASAA for the appeal. Provides the final appeal decision in writing to SAA. 

**g.  Quarterly Report.** SAAs will submit to VA a quarterly report showing the number of approval actions and technical assistance, inspection, approval, and compliance visits, made to educational institutions and/or training establishments for which reimbursement is requested by the SAA pursuant to the terms of the agreement.  Such quarterly report will be accessed and monitored by the ELR.  The ELR will hold a quarterly meeting with the SAA to discuss each the SAA performance during the quarter.  The performance is will measured against the cooperative agreement requirements. 

**h.  SAA Self- Assessment.** SAAs will provide a final self-evaluation to the ELR by the end of October.

**i.  ELR Evaluation.** ELR will measure SAA performance for the fiscal year against the cooperative agreement requirements. ELR will evaluate performance, provide comments and shall provide the SAA their recommended rating of Satisfactory, Minimally Satisfactory or Unsatisfactory.

**j.  Annual Evaluation Protocol.**ELR will complete their evaluation and recommended rating.  The ELR will:

1. Arrange meeting with SAA.

2. Provide evaluation of performance and recommended rating.

3. Provide recommended rating to SAA in writing.

**k.  Joint Peer Review Group (JRPG).** The performance of each SAA during the immediate prior year will be evaluated by a VA representative and a representative identified by the NASAA President.  The evaluators will only utilize the final self-evaluation report provided by the relevant SAA and ELR in order to evaluate performance and recommend a rating.  A recommendation of a final rating for each SAA will be provided to the Rating Decision Official. The Deputy Director, and Assistant Director, Oversight and Accountability, Education Service and President of NASAA will meet with the JPRG members for an out brief at the conclusion of the JPRG session.  The members will discuss the results of the JPRG, recommended ratings, performance concerns, recommendations for underperforming SAAs, and/or accolades. 

**l.  Assignment of Ratings.** The Rating Decision Official determines the final rating that will be assigned by VA.  VA shall provide each SAA with a letter that documents the rating assigned for the fiscal year. The rating assigned shall be Satisfactory, Minimally Satisfactory or Unsatisfactory and will be based on SAA performance. 

**m. Less Than Stafisfactory Ratings.**When VA assigns a minimally satisfactory or unsatifactory rating, it must identify the agreement obligations and/or performance targets that the SAA did not meet..  VA may recommend an action plan and/or may require the SAA to develop an action plan that will correct performance concerns.  This will be noted in the SAA rating letter. 

**n. SAA Review and Appeals****.** Each SAA has the ability to make comment on their rating.  If an SAA has received a less than satisfactory rating, the SAA has 30 calendar days from receipt of a rating in which to appeal in writing to the Director, Education Service via the VACO Education Service, SAA corporate mailbox. SAA has the option for an appeal by teleconference or in person, if SAA funding is available. Each appeal will be heard by the Director, Education Service, and the President of NASAA. The SAA will provide all supporting information to the Director, Education Service no less than five (5) business days prior to the date of the appeal. Following the appeal, if the appeal officials cannot agree on the rating being affirmed or if the rating should be increased the Director, Education Service will exercise authority per 38 USC Section 3674A on behalf of the Secretary to make the final determination. 

**o. Future Cooperative Agreements.**  VA will take into account the result of the annual evaluation of the SAA when considering an agreement for any subsequent agreement period.

**APPENDIX A**

**SAA ADMINISTRATIVE ALLOWANCE**

**($.01 TO $400,000.00)**

| **SALARY & FRINGE** | | **ADMIN                EXP** |  | **SALARY & FRINGE** | | **ADMIN              EXP** |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **FROM** | **TO** | **AMOUNT** |  | **FROM** | **TO** | **AMOUNT** |
| $0.01 | $5,000 | $693 |  | $200,000.01 | $205,000 | $36,769 |
| $5,000.01 | $10,000 | $1,247 |  | $205,000.01 | $210,000 | $37,641 |
| $10,000.01 | $15,000 | $2,402 |  | $210,000.01 | $215,000 | $38,513 |
| $15,000.01 | $20,000 | $3,557 |  | $215,000.01 | $220,000 | $39,385 |
| $20,000.01 | $25,000 | $4,712 |  | $220,000.01 | $225,000 | $40,257 |
| $25,000.01 | $30,000 | $5,867 |  | $225,000.01 | $230,000 | $41,129 |
| $30,000.01 | $35,000 | $7,022 |  | $230,000.01 | $235,000 | $42,001 |
| $35,000.01 | $40,000 | $7,548 |  | $235,000.01 | $240,000 | $42,873 |
| $40,000.01 | $45,000 | $8,547 |  | $240,000.01 | $245,000 | $43,745 |
| $45,000.01 | $50,000 | $9,546 |  | $245,000.01 | $250,000 | $44,617 |
| $50,000.01 | $55,000 | $10,545 |  | $250,000.01 | $255,000 | $45,489 |
| $55,000.01 | $60,000 | $11,544 |  | $255,000.01 | $260,000 | $46,361 |
| $60,000.01 | $65,000 | $12,543 |  | $260,000.01 | $265,000 | $47,233 |
| $65,000.01 | $70,000 | $13,542 |  | $265,000.01 | $270,000 | $48,105 |
| $70,000.01 | $75,000 | $14,541 |  | $270,000.01 | $275,000 | $48,977 |
| $75,000.01 | $80,000 | $14,969 |  | $275,000.01 | $280,000 | $49,849 |
| $80,000.01 | $85,000 | $15,841 |  | $280,000.01 | $285,000 | $50,721 |
| $85,000.01 | $90,000 | $16,713 |  | $285,000.01 | $290,000 | $51,593 |
| $90,000.01 | $95,000 | $17,585 |  | $290,000.01 | $295,000 | $52,465 |
| $95,000.01 | $100,000 | $18,457 |  | $295,000.01 | $300,000 | $53,337 |
| $100,000.01 | $105,000 | $19,329 |  | $300,000.01 | $305,000 | $54,209 |
| $105,000.01 | $110,000 | $20,201 |  | $305,000.01 | $310,000 | $55,081 |
| $110,000.01 | $115,000 | $21,073 |  | $310,000.01 | $315,000 | $55,953 |
| $115,000.01 | $120,000 | $21,945 |  | $315,000.01 | $320,000 | $56,825 |
| $120,000.01 | $125,000 | $22,817 |  | $320,000.01 | $325,000 | $57,697 |
| $125,000.01 | $130,000 | $23,689 |  | $325,000.01 | $330,000 | $58,569 |
| $130,000.01 | $135,000 | $24,561 |  | $330,000.01 | $335,000 | $59,441 |
| $135,000.01 | $140,000 | $25,433 |  | $335,000.01 | $340,000 | $60,313 |
| $140,000.01 | $145,000 | $26,305 |  | $340,000.01 | $345,000 | $61,185 |
| $145,000.01 | $150,000 | $27,177 |  | $345,000.01 | $350,000 | $62,057 |
| $150,000.01 | $155,000 | $28,049 |  | $350,000.01 | $355,000 | $62,929 |
| $155,000.01 | $160,000 | $28,921 |  | $355,000.01 | $360,000 | $63,801 |
| $160,000.01 | $165,000 | $29,793 |  | $360,000.01 | $365,000 | $64,673 |
| $165,000.01 | $170,000 | $30,665 |  | $365,000.01 | $370,000 | $65,545 |
| $170,000.01 | $175,000 | $31,537 |  | $370,000.01 | $375,000 | $66,417 |
| $175,000.01 | $180,000 | $32,409 |  | $375,000.01 | $380,000 | $67,289 |
| $180,000.01 | $185,000 | $33,281 |  | $380,000.01 | $385,000 | $68,161 |
| $185,000.01 | $190,000 | $34,153 |  | $385,000.01 | $390,000 | $69,033 |
| $190,000.01 | $195,000 | $35,025 |  | $390,000.01 | $395,000 | $69,905 |
| $195,000.01 | $200,000 | $35,897 |  | $395,000.01 | $400,000 | $70,777 |

**Table 1.01  SAA Administrative Allowance**

**APPENDIX A**

**SAA ADMINISTRATIVE ALLOWANCE**

**($400,000.01 TO $800,000.00)**

| **SALARY & FRINGE** | | **ADMIN EXP** |  | **SALARY & FRINGE** | | **ADMIN EXP** |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **FROM** | **TO** | **AMOUNT** |  | **FROM** | **TO** | **AMOUNT** |
| $400,000.01 | $405,000 | $71,649 |  | $600,000.01 | $605,000 | $106,529 |
| $405,000.01 | $410,000 | $72,521 |  | $605,000.01 | $610,000 | $107,401 |
| $410,000.01 | $415,000 | $73,393 |  | $610,000.01 | $615,000 | $108,273 |
| $415,000.01 | $420,000 | $74,265 |  | $615,000.01 | $620,000 | $109,145 |
| $420,000.01 | $425,000 | $75,137 |  | $620,000.01 | $625,000 | $110,017 |
| $425,000.01 | $430,000 | $76,009 |  | $625,000.01 | $630,000 | $110,889 |
| $430,000.01 | $435,000 | $76,881 |  | $630,000.01 | $635,000 | $111,761 |
| $435,000.01 | $440,000 | $77,753 |  | $635,000.01 | $640,000 | $112,633 |
| $440,000.01 | $445,000 | $78,625 |  | $640,000.01 | $645,000 | $113,505 |
| $445,000.01 | $450,000 | $79,497 |  | $645,000.01 | $650,000 | $114,377 |
| $450,000.01 | $455,000 | $80,369 |  | $650,000.01 | $655,000 | $115,249 |
| $455,000.01 | $460,000 | $81,241 |  | $655,000.01 | $660,000 | $116,121 |
| $460,000.01 | $465,000 | $82,113 |  | $660,000.01 | $665,000 | $116,993 |
| $465,000.01 | $470,000 | $82,985 |  | $665,000.01 | $670,000 | $117,865 |
| $470,000.01 | $475,000 | $83,857 |  | $670,000.01 | $675,000 | $118,737 |
| $475,000.01 | $480,000 | $84,729 |  | $675,000.01 | $680,000 | $119,609 |
| $480,000.01 | $485,000 | $85,601 |  | $680,000.01 | $685,000 | $120,481 |
| $485,000.01 | $490,000 | $86,473 |  | $685,000.01 | $690,000 | $121,353 |
| $490,000.01 | $495,000 | $87,345 |  | $690,000.01 | $695,000 | $122,225 |
| $495,000.01 | $500,000 | $88,217 |  | $695,000.01 | $700,000 | $123,097 |
| $500,000.01 | $505,000 | $89,089 |  | $700,000.01 | $705,000 | $123,969 |
| $505,000.01 | $510,000 | $89,961 |  | $705,000.01 | $710,000 | $124,841 |
| $510,000.01 | $515,000 | $90,833 |  | $710,000.01 | $715,000 | $125,713 |
| $515,000.01 | $520,000 | $91,705 |  | $715,000.01 | $720,000 | $126,585 |
| $520,000.01 | $525,000 | $92,577 |  | $720,000.01 | $725,000 | $127,457 |
| $525,000.01 | $530,000 | $93,449 |  | $725,000.01 | $730,000 | $128,329 |
| $530,000.01 | $535,000 | $94,321 |  | $730,000.01 | $735,000 | $129,201 |
| $535,000.01 | $540,000 | $95,193 |  | $735,000.01 | $740,000 | $130,073 |
| $540,000.01 | $545,000 | $96,065 |  | $740,000.01 | $745,000 | $130,945 |
| $545,000.01 | $550,000 | $96,937 |  | $745,000.01 | $750,000 | $131,817 |
| $550,000.01 | $555,000 | $97,809 |  | $750,000.01 | $755,000 | $132,689 |
| $555,000.01 | $560,000 | $98,681 |  | $755,000.01 | $760,000 | $133,561 |
| $560,000.01 | $565,000 | $99,553 |  | $760,000.01 | $765,000 | $134,433 |
| $565,000.01 | $570,000 | $100,425 |  | $765,000.01 | $770,000 | $135,305 |
| $570,000.01 | $575,000 | $101,297 |  | $770,000.01 | $775,000 | $136,177 |
| $575,000.01 | $580,000 | $102,169 |  | $775,000.01 | $780,000 | $137,049 |
| $580,000.01 | $585,000 | $103,041 |  | $780,000.01 | $785,000 | $137,921 |
| $585,000.01 | $590,000 | $103,913 |  | $785,000.01 | $790,000 | $138,793 |
| $590,000.01 | $595,000 | $104,785 |  | $790,000.01 | $795,000 | $139,665 |
| $595,000.01 | $600,000 | $105,657 |  | $795,000.01 | $800,000 | $140,537 |

**Table 1.01  SAA Administrative Allowance**

 

**APPENDIX A**

**SAA ADMINISTRATIVE ALLOWANCE**

**($800,000.01 TO $1,100,000.00)**

| **SALARY & FRINGE** | | **ADMIN EXP** |  | **SALARY & FRINGE** | | **ADMIN EXP** |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **FROM** | **TO** | **AMOUNT** |  | **FROM** | **TO** | **AMOUNT** |
| $800,000.01 | $805,000 | $141,409 |  | $950,000.01 | $955,000 | $167,569 |
| $805,000.01 | $810,000 | $142,281 |  | $955,000.01 | $960,000 | $168,441 |
| $810,000.01 | $815,000 | $143,153 |  | $960,000.01 | $965,000 | $169,313 |
| $815,000.01 | $820,000 | $144,025 |  | $965,000.01 | $970,000 | $170,185 |
| $820,000.01 | $825,000 | $144,897 |  | $970,000.01 | $975,000 | $171,057 |
| $825,000.01 | $830,000 | $145,769 |  | $975,000.01 | $980,000 | $171,929 |
| $830,000.01 | $835,000 | $146,641 |  | $980,000.01 | $985,000 | $172,801 |
| $835,000.01 | $840,000 | $147,513 |  | $985,000.01 | $990,000 | $173,673 |
| $840,000.01 | $845,000 | $148,385 |  | $990,000.01 | $995,000 | $174,545 |
| $845,000.01 | $850,000 | $149,257 |  | $995,000.01 | $1,000,000 | $175,417 |
| $850,000.01 | $855,000 | $150,129 |  | $1,000,000.01 | $1,005,000 | $176,289 |
| $855,000.01 | $860,000 | $151,001 |  | $1,005,000.01 | $1,010,000 | $177,161 |
| $860,000.01 | $865,000 | $151,873 |  | $1,010,000.01 | $1,015,000 | $178,033 |
| $865,000.01 | $870,000 | $152,745 |  | $1,015,000.01 | $1,020,000 | $178,905 |
| $870,000.01 | $875,000 | $153,617 |  | $1,020,000.01 | $1,025,000 | $179,777 |
| $875,000.01 | $880,000 | $154,489 |  | $1,025,000.01 | $1,030,000 | $180,649 |
| $880,000.01 | $885,000 | $155,361 |  | $1,030,000.01 | $1,035,000 | $181,521 |
| $885,000.01 | $890,000 | $156,233 |  | $1,035,000.01 | $1,040,000 | $182,393 |
| $890,000.01 | $895,000 | $157,105 |  | $1,040,000.01 | $1,045,000 | $183,265 |
| $895,000.01 | $900,000 | $157,977 |  | $1,045,000.01 | $1,050,000 | $184,137 |
| $900,000.01 | $905,000 | $158,849 |  | $1,050,000.01 | $1,055,000 | $185,009 |
| $905,000.01 | $910,000 | $159,721 |  | $1,055,000.01 | $1,060,000 | $185,881 |
| $910,000.01 | $915,000 | $160,593 |  | $1,060,000.01 | $1,065,000 | $186,753 |
| $915,000.01 | $920,000 | $161,465 |  | $1,065,000.01 | $1,070,000 | $187,625 |
| $920,000.01 | $925,000 | $162,337 |  | $1,070,000.01 | $1,075,000 | $188,497 |
| $925,000.01 | $930,000 | $163,209 |  | $1,075,000.01 | $1,080,000 | $189,369 |
| $930,000.01 | $935,000 | $164,081 |  | $1,080,000.01 | $1,085,000 | $190,241 |
| $935,000.01 | $940,000 | $164,953 |  | $1,085,000.01 | $1,090,000 | $191,113 |
| $940,000.01 | $945,000 | $165,825 |  | $1,090,000.01 | $1,095,000 | $191,985 |
| $945,000.01 | $950,000 | $166,697 |  | $1,095,000.01 | $1,100,000 | $192,857 |

**Table 1.01  SAA Administrative Allowance**

[Back to Top](#TOP)