# Part 3: Chapter 6 - Programs of Education

**Part 3: Chapter 6 - Programs of Education**

[6.01 General](#601)  
[6.02 Program of Education Defined](#602)   
[6.03 Selection of a Program of Education](#603)  
[6.04 Objectives Defined](#604)  
[6.05 Review of Course Approval Data](#605)  
[6.06 Special Courses Which May Be Included in Programs](#606)  
[6.07 Course Not Approved](#607)

   
**6.01  GENERAL**

---

**a.  General.**  Each claimant applying for one of the benefits described in this manual (except for section 901 of Public Law 96-342 and TAT (Tuition Assistance Top-Up)) must select an approved program of education.  

**b.  Principle.**  With the exception of TAT courses, a basic principle is that a claimant must be enrolled in a program of education at all times in order to receive Veterans Administration (VA) education benefits. 

*EXCEPTION:  The chapter 30 program referred to as TAT does not require the claimant to be in a program of education.  See* [22-01-01, Education Provisions of Public Laws 106-398 and 106-419](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000058987?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) *Appendix d, paragraph 7d for instructions.  These instructions will be added to part V in future changes.*

*NOTE:  See chapter 11 for the unique rules which apply to the section 901 benefit.*

**c.  References** 

(1)  [Part 3: Chapter 7 - Restrictions on Training](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000075993?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)  describes restrictions that apply to various programs. 

(2) [Part 4, Award Issues. Chapter 4 - Change of Program](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073551?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)  describes the rules that govern changes of program

**6.02  PROGRAM OF EDUCATION DEFINED**

---

There are separate definitions of "program of education" in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) for each major benefit.  [For chapter 30, see [38 CFR 21.7020(b)(23)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17020).  For chapter 32, see [38 CFR 21.5021(q](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15021)).  For chapter 35, see [38 CFR 21.3021(h)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_13021).  For chapter 1606, see [38 CFR 21.7520(b)(17).](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17520)]  The following is a composite definition.  A program of education:

**a**.  Is a combination of subjects or unit courses pursued at an educational institution.  The combination generally is accepted as necessary to meet the requirements for a predetermined educational, professional or vocational objective.  Except for chapter 35, it may consist of subjects or courses which fulfill requirements for more than one objective, if all objectives pursued are generally recognized as being related to a single career field.

**b.**  Includes an approved full-time program of apprenticeship or other on-the-job training.

**c**.  Is any unit course, subject, or combination of courses or subjects that the Administrator of the Small Business Administration requires to obtain financial assistance under [15 U.S.C. 636](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:15 section:636 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title15-section636)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true).  This type of program cannot be approved for chapter 35. 

**d**.  [Includes approved licensing or certification tests, except for chapter 1606. Also, see [Part 3: Chapter 14 - Upstream Manual](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073494?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)  paragraph 14.02 (national tests) and [22-06-03, Education Provisions of Public Law 109-163](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000096081?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)   (licensing and certifications tests under chapters 1606 and 1607).

*NOTE:  In some cases, both this manual and the education regulations use “program of education” and “course” interchangeably.  In other cases, “course” refers to an individual unit course such as History 101.]*

**6.03  SELECTION OF A PROGRAM OF EDUCATION**

---

**a.  General.**  [A claimant's program must meet each of the following conditions:  

(1)  Meet the definition of a program of education.  (See [Part 3: Chapter 6 - Programs of Education](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073633?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) paragraph 6.02.)  (The program that a claimant states on the application must be complete in that it must include all training needed to reach the stated objective.  It may not include courses vaguely related to the selected objective or courses and subjects desired for self-improvement.) 

*NOTE:  VA will pay only for courses and subjects which are part of an approved program.  (See*[Part 3: Chapter 6 - Programs of Education](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073633?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)*paragraph 6.01 for the TAT exception.)*

(2)  Have an acceptable educational, professional, or vocational objective.  (See [Part 3: Chapter 6 - Programs of Education](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073633?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)  paragraph. 6.04.)

(3)  Be approved for VA training.  (See [Part 3: Chapter 6 - Programs of Education](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073633?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) paragraph. 6.05.)

(4)  The claimant must not be already qualified for the objective of the program.  See [Part 3: Chapter 7 - Restrictions on Training](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000075993?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) for detailed instruction on this issue. 

*NOTE:  See* [Part 4, Award Issues. Chapter 4 - Change of Program](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073551?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)*for change of program information.*

**b.  Proper Completion of Applications.**  Except for persons applying for TAT, claimants must state on their application form their final objective, and their proposed course of study.  They should preferably also state the school or training establishment they plan to attend. (See [Part 3: Chapter 3 - Processing Applications for Benefits](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073583?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)  for the list of application forms used in education benefit programs.) 

(1)  The program outlined on the application must be complete in that it must include all training needed to reach the stated objective.  It may not include courses vaguely related to the selected objective or courses and subjects desired for self-improvement. 

(2)  When a program involves the attainment of more than one degree, the program should be described on the application in terms of the degrees awarded; e.g., B.A. (Bachelor of Arts), M.A. (Master of Arts) and Ph.D. (Doctor of Philosophy). 

(3)  When the proposed program will be pursued sequentially at more than one institution or establishment, the initial application need only include the first institution or establishment.  Subsequent applications must show future training facilities. 

**c.  Selection of an Objective**

(1)  A program of education must lead to one of three types of objectives: educational, professional, or vocational.  (See [Part 3: Chapter 6 - Programs of Education](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073633?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)paragraph 6.01 for the TAT exception.)  An individual pursuing an educational objective need only list the educational objective on his or her application.  However, an individual pursuing a professional or vocational objective must list the occupation which is his or her objective as well as the specific course or courses the individual plans to take.

(2)  If a person requests a program leading to a professional or vocational objective but lists an unrelated vocational or professional course on the application, [the Education Division] should deny the claim. 

(3)  If a person requests a program for a professional or vocational objective in a field in which he or she is already employed, [the Education Division] should consider denying the claim on the grounds that the person is already qualified for the objective.  (See [Part 3: Chapter 7 - Restrictions on Training](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000075993?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)  paragraph 7.07 regarding the "already qualified" principle.)

**6.04  OBJECTIVES DEFINED**

---

*[NOTE:  Except as noted, this paragraph contains background material for claim examiners.  These are rules that State Approving Agency (SAAs) apply during the approval process.]*

**a.  Educational Objectives** ([See 38 CFR 21.4200](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14200)).) 

(1)  General.  An educational objective leads to the awarding of a diploma, degree, or certificate which reflects educational attainment as distinguished from a certificate or a license to practice a profession or trade.  The objective will be the name of the highest degree, diploma, or certificate included in the program, such as a GED (General Educational Development) certificate, high school diploma, bachelor degree, master degree, or Ph.D. degree.  

(2)  Non-Degree Postdoctoral and Graduate Level Certificate Programs. A postdoctoral-level certificate from an accredited college or university may be accepted as an educational objective.  A graduate-level certificate may qualify as leading to an educational objective if the SAA establishes that all of the courses required for completion of the certificate program are accepted by the school for full credit toward completion of approved accredited graduate degree programs.  All of the courses need not be acceptable to any one graduate program, but the courses must all be creditable toward approved graduate degrees offered by the same institution.  SAAs may not approve graduate level certificate programs which fail to meet these requirements.

*NOTE:  Undergraduate-level certificate programs lead to vocational objectives.  See* [*subparagraph c.*](#604c)

**b.  Professional Objectives.** ([See 38 CFR 21.4200](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14230).)

(1)  General.  A professional objective leads to an occupation after an individual completes an extended academic program of study.  The program must be at the college level and be generally accepted as necessary to satisfy the educational requirements for licensing or certification to practice the identified profession.  Typical examples of professional objectives are lawyer, physician (M.D.), teacher, physical therapist, medical technologist, and medical record librarian. 

(i)  A program leading to a professional objective may include courses also leading to an educational objective.  In this situation, the student may specify either the educational objective or the professional objective on his or her application.  Examples are B.S. (Bachelor of Science) degree in secondary education or high school teacher, and J.D. (Juris Doctor) degree or lawyer. 

(ii)  Bar review courses may be approved as part of an overall professional program for a lawyer if a claimant requests such a course to reach his or her professional objective.  Similarly, CPA (Certified Public Accountant) review courses can be approved as part of an overall professional program for a CPA.

(iii)  A combined degree program must lead to a single career field.  This field is normally professional.  (See [subpar. e](#604e).) 

(iv)  Clinical pastoral education programs may lead to either professional or educational objectives.

*NOTE:  In the absence of an educational certificate, an approved postdoctoral program (including a medical program not involving a residency) offered by an accredited institution of higher learning qualifies as a program of education leading to an occupation when it is specifically required to practice a profession.  Except in the medical field, postdoctoral training is seldom a general requirement for employment or for licensing to practice a profession.  When it is generally accepted as necessary to obtain employment or to practice a profession, a postdoctoral course may be included in a program of education for a vocational or professional objective.*

(2)  Internships [(38 CFR 21.4265(a)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14265)).  An internship is a period of supervised practical training required for licensing to practice a profession.  It is distinguished from an experience requirement in which the applicant must practice the profession for a predetermined period before receiving the license or certificate.  For example, suppose a state requires a person to be employed in an accounting office for a specified period after completing the educational requirements for a CPA.  This would be an experience requirement.  Experience requirements are not acceptable for educational assistance payments. 

(i)  Osteopathy.  A claimant pursuing an internship in osteopathy has a professional objective of physician (D.O.) unless he or she specifies a specialty.  For example, the specialty could be a pathologist, surgeon, or obstetrician. 

(ii)  Other.  The professional objective of any other accredited internship program will be the name of the occupation for which the internship is required. 

(3)  Residencies [(38 CFR 21.4265(a))](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14265).  A residency is an advanced supervised period of training required for specialized practice in a profession. 

(i)  Medical.  When the residency course leads to certification by a specialty or subspecialty board, the professional objective is the named specialty or subspecialty for which the board has established standards.  Examples would include orthopedic surgeon, pathologist, or specialist in physical medicine and rehabilitation.  Medical training at the postdoctoral level by an accredited IHL (Institution of Higher Learning), such as a college or university school of medicine, which leads to a certificate showing educational attainment will be accepted as an educational objective.  This applies even if there is no specialty board for the training.  A medical residency must be accredited either by the Accreditation Council on Graduate Medical Education of the American Medical Association, or where the Council has delegated this authority, by the appropriate Residency Review Committee.   

*NOTE:  The American Psychoanalytic Association accredits courses designed to train people with an M.D. degree to become psychoanalysts.  See*[Part 9: Chapter 3 - Review of Approvals - Specific Criteria for Institutions of Higher Learning and Noncollege Degree Institutions](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073748?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)*, for information on these courses which, to be approved, may not include residencies.*

(ii)  Osteopathy.  The professional objective of a claimant pursuing a residency course in osteopathy will be that named specialty for which certification is given by the appropriate American Osteopathic Association Specialty Board. 

(iii)  Optometry.  A claimant does not have to pursue a residency in optometry to practice the profession of optometry.  Therefore, a residency in optometry may not be approved as a regular training program or as refresher training.

(4)  Medical Subspecialty.  A medical subspecialty may be permitted when the subspecialty is one for which there is a board, and a certification will be issued by the board upon completion of the subspecialty.  A residency which is not accredited or does not lead to certification by a specialty or subspecialty board may not be approved as part of a program of education.  It does not matter that the program leads to a certificate granted by an accredited IHL.   

(5)  Nursing Courses ([38 CFR 21.4265(b))](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14265)[.](http://www.warms.vba.va.gov/REGS/38CFR/BOOKG/PART21/s21_4265.doc)  A claimant may pursue the professional objective of registered nurse or registered professional nurse for training given by autonomous schools of nursing, hospital schools of nursing, or schools of nursing established in other schools or departments of colleges or universities.  All other nursing objectives such as practical nurse or licensed practical nurse are properly classified as vocational objectives.

(6)  ROTC Programs.  A student in an ROTC (Reserve Officer Training Corps) program is commissioned as an officer only if he or she receives a degree.  Therefore, since a degree is one of the requirements to become a commissioned officer, the objective of commissioned officer is a professional objective.  A student in an ROTC scholarship program may show his or her objective to be commissioned officer.  For ROTC programs, the school certifies required courses for the degree (including electives) and those required for the ROTC program. 

**c.  Vocational Objectives.** ([See 38 CFR 21.4200](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14230).)  A vocational objective leads to an occupation ordinarily attained after completion of a business, technical, trade, or other vocational school course, or an apprenticeship or other on-the-job training program.  [A vocational objective must be a recognized employment objective.  It should be of the type previously listed in the DOL (Department of Labor) Dictionary of Occupational Titles, but currently in the DOL "O\*NET" database, at the following Internet site:"<http://www.doleta.gov/programs/onet/>".  Examples of vocational objectives are barber, secretary, machinist, computer programmer, automobile mechanic, and practical nurse.  With respect to non-degree certificate programs, an undergraduate level certificate from an accredited college or university may be accepted as leading to a vocational objective.  See [subparagraph a](#604a) regarding graduate and postdoctoral certificate programs.]

**d. Dual Objectives**. VA students may pursue programs of education leading to more than one educational, professional, or vocational objective. The objectives do not necessarily have to be on the same professional or technical level; however, depending on the combination, specific SAA approval may be required. As defined in [38 CFR 21.7020(b)(23)(ii)](https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-38/chapter-I/part-21/subpart-K/subject-group-ECFRfd3f2192af1938b/section-21.7020), a program of education “may consist of subjects or courses which fulfill requirements for more than one objective if all objectives pursued are generally recognized as being related to a single career field.” When specific SAA approval is required, SAAs review both objectives to ensure they align. VA benefits are payable to students who concurrently pursue two different objectives (e.g., a degree and a certificate) at the same school. A dual objective program may be a combination of credit and clock hours. SCOs will report enrollment periods separately if the beginning/ending dates of the clock hour program differ. SeeM22-4, Part IX, Chapter 3, Section 3.03 and  M22-1, Part IX, Subpart ii, 4.B.2.bfor additional information.

1. **Currently Enrolled.** Prior to January 1, 2026, SCOs are permitted to certify dual objectives using the same certification method for dual degrees using VBA/custom remarks (see M22-1, Part IX, Subpart ii, 4.B.2.b). Any current VA students pursuing a dual objective program without specific SAA approval may continue to be certified and receive benefits until January 1, 2026.
2. **Newley Enrolled.** Specific dual objective approval is required for VA students entering a new dual objective program. VCEs will deny any dual objective program not specifically listed as an approved program in WEAMS.
3. **One Program in WEAMS.** Once the dual objective program is approved by the SAA and in WEAMS, it will be an available program option for SCOs to select in Enrollment Manager (e.g., AOS Computer Science/Cloud Computing Certificate).
4. **All Enrollments on or After January 1, 2026.** Effective January 1, 2026, dual objectives must have specific approval before benefits can be paid. VCEs will deny any dual objective program not specifically listed as an approved program in WEAMS.

**e. Specific SAA Approval Not Required**. The following combinations do not require specific SAA approval:

1. **Dual Degrees**. VA benefits are payable to students who concurrently pursue two different approved degrees at the same school. Each program must be approved by the SAA; however, specific approval for dual degrees is NOT required.
2. **Dual Majors and Major/Minor Combinations**. Students may pursue a dual major or a minor as part of a single objective. SAAs do NOT need to approve dual majors or minors even if pursuit requires the student to extend the length of their program beyond what is normally required for graduation.

**6.05  REVIEW OF COURSE APPROVAL DATA**

---

**a.  General.**  [The Education Division should verify course approval from OLAF (On-line Approval File).  See [OLAF (ON–LINE APPROVAL FILE) FOR WINDOWS](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000078697?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)  to learn what data is in OLAF and how to do searches.   Approval data does not need to be reviewed in all IHL cases.  See [subparagraph f.](#605f)  If you request a print, OLAF prints approval data on VA Form 22-1998 (OLAF Report).].

*[NOTE:  Course approval is not an issue for TAT courses.  (See* [Part 3: Chapter 6 - Programs of Education](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073633?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)*paragraph 6.01 for TAT exception.)]*

[**b.  Approval Not in OLAF.**  If the OLAF record does not provide the information necessary to process an application, contact the ELR (Education Liaison Representative) for the additional information.]

**c.  [Reserved for Future Use]**

**d.  [Reserved for Future Use]**  

**e.  [Reserved for Future Use]**

**f.  IHLs Exempt From Approval Review.** (See [RPO Letter 22-07-01](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000062304?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) ) An [EO (Education Officer)] may identify IHLs that do not require review of approval information before processing applications.  When the EO identifies such schools, he or she should notify the CELO (Chief Education Liaison Officer) to have the appropriate ELR update the OLAF “IHL Exempt” field on the Issues/Remarks screen.  However, this discretion must be specifically authorized in writing by the EO] and must be limited to programs from large or well-known IHLs that have not had a history of approval or certification problems.  The ELR will recommend institutions that meet these requirements.  Institutions meeting these requirements will appear on the OLAF IHLs Exempt from Review listing which is produced from OLAF.

(1)  [See [Part 9: Chapter 8 - Records, Files, and Reports](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000080120?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) paragraph 8.06a(6) for information on the IHL Exempt field.

*NOTE:  If an application or accompanying enrollment certification raises issues involving branches or additional facilities, cooperative training, independent study, practical training, remedial courses, deficiency courses, or refresher courses, [review the OLAF record.  When necessary, consult the CELO on this issue.  The CELO should contact the appropriate ELR to resolve that issue.]*

(2)  [The Education Division should check the listing on the first workday of each month.  If the listing has been updated, print and distribute it as necessary.  If the listing has not been updated, contact the CELO and request him or her to have the appropriate ELR(s) update the listing.]  The listing is only valid for 30 days from the date printed on it.  Dispose of old listings in accordance with RCS VB-1, part 1, item number 13-005.000.

(3)  If the [EO receives an approval problem from the ELR or determines that an exempt IHL has a problem from an adjudication standpoint, he or she will issue a written memorandum explaining this to the Education Section and the CELO.  Adjudicators will have to begin reviewing OLAF approval data on all applications for programs of education at that school.  The CELO should have the appropriate ELR immediately update the OLAF record.]

(4)  If the problem is resolved, the [EO will issue another written memorandum explaining this to the Education Division and the CELO.  Adjudicators will no longer have to review OLAF approval data on all applications for programs of education at that school.  The CELO will have the ELR immediately update the OLAF record.] 

**6.06  SPECIAL COURSES WHICH MAY BE INCLUDED IN PROGRAMS**

---

In the instances listed in this paragraph, the Education Division may approve the addition of certain courses as part of the claimant's program.  In each case, the claimant's school must certify that such courses are required. 

**a.  Courses Required for Admission to the Next Level of Training.** Courses required for admission to the next level of training may be approved in two situations.  The first is when an IHL requires a student to pursue courses at an educational level for which he or she already holds a diploma or degree.  The second is when an IHL requires a student to pursue courses at an educational level for which he or she appears qualified by reason of previous training.  For example, a college may require a student with a B.A. degree to take some undergraduate subjects for admission to a graduate degree program, or to gain teacher certification for specific subjects.  A statement from the school as to requirements of any specific courses for the student must accompany the claimant's application. 

**b.  Grade Point Deficiency.**  When additional subjects beyond those generally required for a degree are needed in order to overcome a grade point deficiency for continuation in the approved program, the additional subjects may be approved.  The school must certify that:

(1)  The student is taking the courses for the purpose of removing the grade point deficiency;

(2)  No course previously taken for which credit has been granted is being repeated, unless repetition of that particular course is required for continuation in the approved program; and

(3)  The student's progress is satisfactory under the school's standards. 

**c.  Language Courses for Graduate Students.**  When an applicant requests a language course to help pass a language examination requirement for a graduate degree, the course may be approved as part of the program if the graduate institution certifies that the course will assist the applicant in passing the examination.  This does not mean that VA will grant the approval for subjects taken abroad which are not creditable toward the degree but are merely to "learn the language" in order to pass an examination in a U.S. institution.

**d.  Noncredit Deficiency, Remedial, or Refresher Courses.**  See [Part 3: Chapter 7 - Restrictions on Training](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000075993?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) .

**e.  Concurrent Enrollment.**  See [Part 4: Chapter 1 - Enrollment Certification](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073421?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) .

**f.  Full Credit Refresher Training.**  See [Part 3: Chapter 7 - Restrictions on Training](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000075993?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) 

**6.07  COURSE NOT APPROVED**

---

**a.  General**.  Courses may be not approved for a variety of reasons.  See subchapter I of chapter 7.  Some courses may never be approved because they fail to meet legal requirements.  Some may be approved under certain conditions or for certain benefit programs.  Others are not currently approved but might become approved in the future.  The adjudicator must consult with the ELR in all cases where a course is not approved unless the [situations or circumstances in [subparagraphs c](#607c) or d below clearly apply.  This initial consultation can be made using electronic mail.  The Education Division] should ask the ELR at that RPO who will then coordinate with the ELR having jurisdiction over the school.

*[NOTE:  Course approval is not an issue for TAT courses.  (See* [*par. 6.01*](#601) *for TAT exception.)]*

**b.  Course Not Approved by SAA or VA**

(1)  If the ELR confirms that the course is not approved by the SAA or VA, the adjudicator will annotate the application "course not approved" in accordance with [paragraph 6.05e](#605e) and disallow the claim.  [In TIMS, put appropriate information in a FLASH.]  (See fig. 9.08 for suggested wording on the notification letter when the SAA is the approval authority.  See fig. 9.09 for suggested wording on the notification letter when VA is the approval authority.) 

(2)  For courses that are not approved, send one copy of the notification letter to the ELR having jurisdiction over the school.  This notification can be sent using electronic means.  Send a copy of the notification letter to the SAA having jurisdiction over the school.  ***See***[Privacy Issues When Copying a Third Party on PCGL Letters](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000076742?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)***dated 9/4/07 for more information.*** 

(3)  The ELR having jurisdiction over the school should retain copies of denial letters for one year.  He or she should compare them to approvals as they are received.

(4)  If the course is approved during the year that the copy of the notification letter is retained, the ELR should return the copy to the [Education Division] with an Optional Form 41 indicating that the [course is approved and the file number of the claimant who had been denied for that course.  The ELR should specify at least the date of approval and the facility code.  The ELRs at ROs and RPOs have the option of sending this information using electronic means.  The Education Division] should pull the claimant's folder and take appropriate action on the claim.

**c.  Course Not Approvable**.  If the adjudicator, after reviewing [Part 3: Chapter 7 - Restrictions on Training](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000075993?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)  or consulting with the ELR, determines that the course is not approvable, he or she should annotate the application (see [par. 6.05e(3](#605e))) with "course not approvable" and disallow the claim.  In TIMS, put appropriate information in a FLASH.  (See figs. 9.10 and 9.11 for suggested wording on the notification letter.)

**d.  Course Approved but Not Appropriate**.  If a course is approved but is clearly not permitted for a particular category of claimant, [the Education Division] may deny such claims without referral to the ELR.  [In TIMS, put appropriate information in a FLASH.]  For example, a child under chapter 35 applies for a correspondence course.  The Education Division may deny such a claim since chapter 7 clearly indicates that chapter 35 children may not take correspondence courses.  (See fig. 9.11 for suggested wording on the dictated notification letter.)