# Part 3: Chapter 5 - Counseling

**Part 3: Chapter 5 - Counseling**

 [5.01 Purpose](#501)  
[5.02 Background](#502)  
[5.03 Eligibility for Counseling](#503)  
[5.04 Initial Processing of Counseling Requests (Local RO)](#504)  
[5.05 RPO Processing of Counseling Requests](#505)  
[5.06 RPO Procedures for Cases Requiring Counseling](#506)  
[5.07 RPO Procedures for Referring Cases to VR&C](#507)  
[5.08 Disposition of Required Counseling Cases](#508)

  

**5.01 PURPOSE**

---

This chapter provides the Adjudication procedures necessary to ensure that claimants receive the VA (Veterans Abministration) counseling they are entitled to under the education benefit laws. 

*NOTE:  This chapter does not discuss other types of counseling: counseling by the State Employment Service (Job Service), preseparation counseling by the service departments, readjustment counseling, or counseling by Veterans Benefit Counselors.*

**5.02  BACKGROUND**

---

**a.  Counseling Goals**.  Counseling can assist a claimant in the following areas:

(1)  In selecting an educational, professional, or vocational objective.

(2)  In developing a suitable program to achieve the objective.

(3)  In selecting a school or training establishment.

(4)  In resolving any personal problems which interfere with the pursuit of training.

(5)  In selecting a job if the claimant does not pursue training.

**b.  Required Counseling**.  In certain situations, counseling is required by law.  (See [par. 5.06](#506).) 

**c.  Eligibility for Requested Counseling**.  Claimants can request counseling, even when not required by law.  (See [par. 5.03a](#503a).)

**d.  Counseling Application**.  A formal application, VA Form 28-8832, Veterans Application for Counseling, is required whenever a claimant applies for counseling.  Send all requests for counseling, whether formal or informal, to the VR&C (Vocational Rehabilitation and Counseling) Division (with jurisdiction over the claimant's address) for processing.

**e.  Counseling Outside United States.**  Counseling is not available outside the States, territories and possessions of the United States, the District of Columbia, and the commonwealth of Puerto Rico.

**5.03  ELIGIBILITY FOR COUNSELING**

---

**a.  Requirements.** A claimant is eligible for counseling if he or she meets any one of the following three requirements:

(1)  Eligible to receive benefits under chapters 30, 32, 35 of title 38, U.S. Code, chapter 1606 of title 10, U. S. Code, Sections 901 or 903 of Public Law 96-342, or the Omnibus Diplomatic Security and Antiterrorism Act of 1986 and is within his or her delimiting period.  A claimant is still eligible for counseling even if all entitlement has been exhausted.

(2)  On active duty with the Armed Forces and is within 180 days of discharge or release from active duty (whether or not he or she is eligible for education benefits) and has a projected discharge under conditions other than dishonorable.

(3)  Within one year of his or her last discharge or release from active duty which was under other than dishonorable conditions.

*NOTE:  Requirements 2 and 3 are considered "extended eligibility" criteria.  See subparagraph b.*

**b.  "Extended Eligibility"**

(1)  Public Law 102-16, effective March 22, 1991, extended eligibility for counseling to individuals not receiving benefits.  Before that date, a claimant had to be entitled to receive benefits in order to qualify for counseling. 

(2)  Individuals requesting counseling under extended eligibility must submit evidence to verify entitlement for counseling services.  Evidence for extended eligibility for counseling includes the following:

(i)  If the claimant is on active duty but within 180 days before discharge from active duty, he or she must submit evidence showing the date entered on active duty and the anticipated date of discharge.  This evidence includes but is not limited to a brief letter from his or her commanding officer stating that the claimant is serving on active duty with the Armed Forces and is expected to leave active duty within the next 6 months and that the character of the claimant's anticipated discharge is honorable (other than dishonorable).

(ii)  If the claimant was discharged from active duty less than one year before filing the application, he or she must submit evidence showing the date of release from active duty and character of discharge.  This evidence includes but is not limited to a copy of his or her DD 214, Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty.  BIRLS (Beneficiary Identification and Record Locator Subsystem) may be used to verify the date of discharge from active duty and character of discharge.  (See par. 3.07b for using BIRLS to verify service.)

**5.04  INITIAL PROCESSING OF COUNSELING REQUESTS (LOCAL RO)**

---

**a.**  Upon receipt at an RO (Regional Office), send all counseling requests directly to the VR&C Division.  VR&C will use BDN (Benefits Delivery Network) to determine whether or not the applicant is eligible for counseling.  

**b**.  If VR&C cannot determine eligibility for counseling, VR&C will refer the counseling request to the local Adjudication Division.  That Adjudication Division will review BDN; if eligibility can be determined from BDN, notify VR&C accordingly.  If the local Adjudication Division determines that a benefit eligibility determination is necessary in order to determine the claimant's eligibility to receive counseling, the local Adjudication Division will forward the request to the RPO (Regional Processing Office) to make a formal determination. 

**5.05  RPO PROCESSING OF COUNSELING REQUESTS**

---

**a.  Initial Review.**  After receiving a request from a local Adjudication Division (or their own VR&C Division), the RPO Adjudication Division will develop as appropriate for the evidence necessary to make a benefit eligibility determination. 

**b.  RPO Determination Concerning Education Benefits and Counseling** 

*NOTE:  The Baltimore RO retains processing jurisdiction over the Diplomatic Antiterrorism Act cases.  For these cases, the Baltimore RO will process counseling requests the same as an RPO.*

(1)  If the RPO determines that the claimant is eligible for education benefits and is within his or her delimiting date, the RPO will notify VR&C of the claimant's eligibility to counseling.  (See [par. 5.07](#507) for suggested means of notifying VR&C.)

(2)  If the claimant is not eligible for benefits (a claim for benefits has been or would be disallowed), review the claimant's active duty service to determine if the claimant is eligible for extended counseling.  (See [par. 5.03b](#503b).)  Notify VR&C whether the claimant qualifies or does not qualify for counseling under the extended criteria.

*NOTE:  When Adjudication makes a benefit eligibility determination, take work credit by using the PCLR (Pending Issue Clear) BDN command to take an appropriate one-time supplemental end product in any of the above situations, e.g., end product 210 for a chapter 30 determination.*

**5.06  RPO PROCEDURES FOR CASES REQUIRING COUNSELING**

---

**a.**  Claimants Rated Incompetent by VA

(1)  Except for chapter 35 claimants, claimants rated incompetent *by VA* must have counseling before selecting a program of education or training under any law covered by this manual.  Adjudication must refer such cases to VR&C *before* awarding benefits or issuing a Certificate of Eligibility.  For veterans rated incompetent and receiving compensation benefits, review the M11, C&P Master Record Status screen.  The COMP-PMT field will show I (for incompetent) for these veterans.

(2)  VR&C will develop the case and review all recommendations with the veteran and the guardian.  The guardian may accept these recommendations or may elect a different program.  The counseling requirement is complete at this point.  VR&C will forward the information contained on VA Form 28-1902k, Counseling Record, to the Adjudication Division for further action.

*NOTE:  The above rule regarding counseling for incompetent claimants does not apply to veterans and other claimants who are judged incompetent by a court (as opposed to a VA rating of incompetency).*

**b.  Spouses or Surviving Spouses.**  Counseling is required if a spouse or surviving spouse requests specialized vocational training under [38 U.S.C. 3536.](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3536 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3536)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true)  Refer these requests to VR&C before processing an award or Certificate of Eligibility even if a school certifies the need for the specialized vocational training on VA Form 22-1999, Enrollment Certification. 

**c.  Children.**  Refer the following to VR&C for counseling before processing an award or Certificate of Eligibility:

(1)  Claim from an eligible child having a mental or physical disability.  In such cases, VR&C determines the need for the following special training programs:

(i)  Special Restorative Training under 38 CFR 21.3300 through 21.3307,

(ii)  Specialized vocational training under [38 CFR 21.4232](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14232), and

(2)  Claims for special restorative training or specialized vocational training; and

(3)  Claim from an eligible child who has reached the compulsory school attendance age under State law, but has neither reached his or her 18th birthday nor completed secondary schooling.

*NOTE:  If the claimant for whom counseling is required submits information developed through counseling by non-VA staff, forward this information to the VR&C Division.  VR&C will review the information and send the claimant their recommendation(s) concerning the non-VA counseling information.  VR&C will also inform Adjudication of their recommendation to the claimant.*

**5.07  RPO PROCEDURES FOR REFERRING CASES TO VR&C**

---

**a.  Identification Information for Counseling.**  Adjudication at the RPOs will use electronic mail to furnish VR&C with the following information when counseling is required or when the claimant requests counseling:  

(1)  Name and complete mailing address of the applicant.

(2)  VA File Number.  This will be either an 8-digit claim number or the social security number.  For chapter 35 referrals, include the suffix.  For example, "W" for a spouse or surviving spouse or "A" for the first child's record.

(3)  Education benefit.  If the applicant is eligible for benefits, indicate the benefit(s) (e.g., chapter 30).

(4)  Date of discharge from active duty.  (For veterans only)

(5)  Character of discharge.  (For veterans only)

(6)  Reason for counseling.  If counseling is required, state the reason (e.g., incompetent, SRT, etc.) and that VR&C should furnish results of counseling.  If counseling is requested but is not required, so state.

(7)  Name, telephone number, and date.  Enter the name of the unit chief or the specific adjudicator handling the claim, the commercial telephone number of the individual, the designation of the unit, and the date.

**b.  Electronic Referrals.**  Send the information using electronic mail to the VR&C Officer having jurisdiction over the applicant's address.

**c.  Documentation.**  Retain a copy of the referral to VR&C in the claimant's folder.

**d.  End Product Credit.**  [Paragraph 5.06](#506) specifies cases requiring counseling.  In these instances, the claimant will have submitted a claim for benefits.  Set up an appropriate end product for the specific benefit. 

**5.08  DISPOSITION OF REQUIRED COUNSELING CASES**

---

VR&C will  notify the RPO Adjudication Division of the results of required counseling.  (See [par. 5.06.](#506)) 

**a.  Counseling Not Initiated or Suspended.**  For required counseling, when the claimant does not begin counseling or VR&C suspends counseling, deny the claim for benefits and take the pending end product.  Send the claimant a dictated letter, giving complete explanation of the reasons and appeal rights.  Annotate the information from VR&C with the end product and file it on the right side of the folder. 

**b.  Counseling Completed.** When VR&C completes required counseling, VR&C will send the RPO Adjudication Division the items currently shown on VA Form 28-1902k, Counseling Request.  If VR&C recommends program approval, issue the Certificate of Eligibility or prepare an award as appropriate.  If VR&C recommends program disapproval, deny the claim for benefits and take the pending end product.  Note however, for a claimant rated incompetent, the guardian is not bound by the VR&C disapproval and may choose a different program.  (See [par. 5.06a(2).](#506a2))  If this should occur and the program selected is approved, allow the claim and take the appropriate end product.

**c.  Chapter 31 Elected.**  Ensure that duplicate benefits are not paid.  See [Part 4, Award Issues. Chapter 3 - Duplication of Benefits](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073517?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) paragraphs 3.01 and 3.02.

**d.  Disposition of Material in Counseling Folder**

(1)  Once counseling is complete (or the claimant has failed to report for counseling), VR&C will retain the counseling material in inactive storage.  

(2)  ROs will destroy the counseling material the year after the person's delimiting date.  (See Records Control Schedule VB-1, part I, Item No. 07-620.022.)