# Part 4: Chapter 2 - Flight, Correspondence, Licensing and Certification, National Examinations, and Preparatory Courses

**Part 4: Chapter 2 - Flight, Correspondence, Licensing and Certification, National Examinations, and Preparatory Courses**

 

**[Subchapter 1. Flight Training](#SI)**  
**[2.01 General](#201)  
[2.02 Eligibility Criteria for Vocational Flight Training](#202)  
[2.03 Flight Courses](#203)  
[2.04 Enrollment Certification](#204)  
[2.05 Flight Objectives](#205)  
[2.06 Credit for Prior Training](#206)  
[2.07 Changes of Program Vocational](#207)  
[2.08 Already Qualified and Refresher Flight Training Vocational and Non-College Degree](#208)  
[2.09 Non-Reimbursable Flight Training](#209)  
[2.10 Combination College Degree – Flight Training Programs](#210)  
[2.11 Flight Award and Monthly Certification of Flight Training Procedures](#211)**  
  
**[Subchapter 2. Correspondence Training](#SII)**  
**[2.12 General](#212)  
[2.13 Eligibility Criteria for Correspondence Training](#213)  
[2.14 Enrollment Certification](#214)  
[2.15 Affirmation of Enrollment](#215)  
[2.16 Credit for Prior Training and Non-Reimbursable Lessons](#216)  
[2.17 Correspondence Award and Certification of Lessons Completed Procedures](#217)**

[**Subchapter 3. Licensing and Certification (LAC), National Examinations, and Preparatory Courses**](#SUBCHAPTER_3._LICENSING_AND_CERTIFICATION_(LAC),_NATIONAL_EXAMINATIONS,_AND_PREPARATORY_COURSES)

[**2.18 General**](#2_._18_General)

[**2.19 Definitions**](#2_._19_Definitions)

[**2.20 Background**](#2._20_Background)

[**2.21 Forms Management**](#2.21_Forms_Management)

[**2.22 Eligibility Criteria**](#2.22_Eligibility_Criteria)

[**2.23 Application Documentation**](#2.23_Application_and_Documentation)

[**2.24 Payment Rules**](#2.24_Payment_and_Entitlement_Rules)

[**2.25 Reimbursement Procedures**](#2.25_Reimbursement_Procedures)

[**2.26 Reimbursement for Preparatory Courses**](#2.26_Reimbursement_for_Preparatory_Courses)

 

**SUBCHAPTER 1.  FLIGHT TRAINING**

**2.01 GENERAL** (Change 7, January 18, 1996)

---

**a. Contents.** This subchapter provides instructions for processing claims for vocational flight training. This subchapter covers eligibility, flight objectives, and the review of enrollment certifications.

**b. Chapter 30 and 1606.** Chapter 30 and 1606 trainees may receive reimbursement at the 60 percent rate for training beginning September 30, 1990.  Refer to [M22-4: Part 4- Chapter 1 Enrollment Certification 1.19](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073421/Part-4-Chapter-1-Enrollment-Certification) for Out of System (OOS) and Benefits Manager processing.

**c. Chapter 32 and Section 903.** Chapter 32 and section 903 of Public Law 96-342 trainees may receive reimbursement at the 60 percent rate for training beginning April 1, 1991.

**d. Chapter 35 and Section 901.** Chapter 35 and section 901 of Public Law 96-342 trainees may not receive reimbursement for vocational flight training.

**e. College Degree Programs.** Students under all benefit programs may receive benefits for flight training courses that are part of an approved college degree program. (See [paragraph 2.10](#210).)

****

**2.02 ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR VOCATIONAL FLIGHT TRAINING** (Change 28, November 5, 2004)

---

**a. Private Pilot Certificate.** [A student must have an unlimited private pilot certificate issued under [FAR (Federal Aviation Regulations) Part 61, Subpart E](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=45&SID=ea20b960e3dc0fa803e86c06825c1d72&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=sp14.2.61.e&r=SUBPART), to receive VA benefits for flight courses except for ground instructor certification courses.] A student may not receive benefits for a recreational pilot or a private pilot certification course. A recreational pilot certificate does not meet the private pilot requirements. Flight schools and flight training centers must have a photocopy of each student's private pilot certificate in their records.

**b. Medical Certificate**

[*NOTE: A first-class medical certificate is valid for six months for operations requiring an airline transport pilot certificate. It is valid for twelve months for operations requiring other flight certificates. In essence a first class medical certificate is valid for six months; then it becomes a second class medical certificate for six months ([14 CFR, Sec. 61.23(d)(1)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se14.2.61_123)).*

1. If a student is enrolled in a flight course other than an Airline Transport Pilot (ATP) course, the student must hold a second-class medical certificate on the first day of training. (If that course began before October 1, 1998, the student must have held that certificate continuously during training.) A second-class medical certificate expires at the end of the last day of the twelfth month following the date of examination shown on the certificate ([(14 CFR, Sec. 61.23(d)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se14.2.61_123)). (See Policy Advisory dated 10/11/05)

**Example:** A second-class medical certificate issued on April 9, 2003, is valid through April 30, 2004.

2. If a student is enrolled in an ATP certification course, the student must hold a first-class medical certificate on the first day of training. (If that course began before October 1, 1998, the student must have held that certificate continuously during training.) A first-class medical certificate expires at the end of the last day of the sixth month following the date of examination shown on the certificate ([14 CFR, Sec. 61.23(d)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se14.2.61_123)).

**Example:** A first-class medical certificate issued on June 12, 2004, is valid through December 31, 2004.]

3. A student in a ground instructor course does not need to have a medical certificate.

4. A student must have the proper medical certificate at the start of training.

*NOTE: Flight schools and training centers certify on VA Form 22-1999, Enrollment Certification, that the student has a private pilot's certificate and that they have copies of the required medical certificate.*

**c. Enrollment Certification Issues.**

1. [Certifications as to Medical Certificates. For the initial enrollment certification for a flight course, flight schools should put the name and date of the medical certificate in the Remarks section of the enrollment certification. If this medical certificate information is not submitted, RPOs will develop for it. If the medical certificate is not valid on the day that the course begins, RPOs will deny the claim.  
 

*NOTE: If the Enrollment Certification is accompanied by VA Form 22-6553c, Monthly Certification of Flight Training, the adjudicator should accept the certification shown on this form as to the student's medical certificate.*

2. Questions and Answers

Question 1: If the claimant is enrolled in consecutive flight courses at the same flight school (CFI, CFII, etc.), do we need medical certificate information each time?

Answer 1: No, medical certificate information should not be requested each time a claimant is enrolled in consecutive flight courses when the claimant has a valid medical certificate covering the beginning date of each course in question.

**Example:** Jack received his second class medical certificate which was dated September 1, 2002. He starts a course on October 2, 2002, and completes the course on November 5, 2002, and begins a new course on November 7, 2002. Since a second class medical certificate is good for 12 months, we could pay benefits during the consecutive enrollments.

Question 2: A veteran began flight training on October 1, 2002. Although he had an expired 2nd class medical certificate, this was overlooked by him and the school certifying official. As a result, the veteran can not be paid for any training. However, if the veteran quits the course, gets the proper medical certificate and reenrolls in the course, can he began receiving benefits?

Answer 2: Yes, the veteran can begin receiving benefits if he gets the proper medical certificate and reenrolls in the course. Although we can not pay him for the portion of the course already completed, we can grant appropriate credit.]

**d. Objective.** A student must pursue a vocational objective in aviation. Benefits are not payable for ancillary, vocational, or recreational objectives.

1. Ancillary training is subordinate to the student's primary vocational objective.

**Example:** A physician, lawyer, rancher, or sales representative may fly an aircraft during the conduct of his or her business or profession. Additional flight training would be helpful in the pursuit of his or her business or profession.

2. If a student who does not hold a commercial pilot certificate requests an advanced flight course, consider the possibility that the training is ancillary training.

**Example:** A sales representative requests a multiengine rating course to fly the company's multiengine aircraft.

3. If a student requests benefits for ancillary training, prepare a dictated letter. Explain that VA may not pay benefits for ancillary training. Request the student to submit evidence to show that his or her objective is vocational rather than ancillary. The evidence may include statements from flight schools, flight training centers, or prospective employers. Enclose VA Form 4107, Notice of Procedural and Appellate Rights.

**e. ATP Prerequisite.** A student in an ATP course must have 1,500 hours of flight time before starting the course.

****

**2.03 FLIGHT COURSES** (Change 22, August 26, 2021)

---

**a.  Commercial Pilot Course**  

1. From 1974 to August 3, 1998, the commercial pilot certification course combined the training for a commercial pilot certificate and an instrument rating. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) has continued to approve combination commercial and instrument rating courses under the revised [FAR Part 141](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4d9ca076bb07560f1094376c224cc8d9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt14.3.141&r=PART). Students must have an instrument rating before starting a *fixed wing* commercial pilot certification course, or be concurrently enrolled in a commercial rating course and an instrument rating course at the same time or enrolled in a combination commercial /instrument certification course. 

For *rotor wing* courses, students may enroll in a stand-alone commercial pilot certification course or be concurrently enrolled in an commercial pilot certification course and instrument pilot certification course at the same time, or enrolled in a combination commercial/instrument certification course. Additionally, a student pilot with a commercial license for rotor wing can enroll in a stand-alone instrument rating course. Under the FAR, students pursuing a *rotor wing* course are not required to possess or purse an instrument certification to receive a commercial pilot certification.

2. Veterans Affairs (VA) regulations requires a student take the commercial pilot certification course first. The only exceptions are for students who already have a commercial pilot certificate or is enrolling in a ground instructor certification course. (See [subparagraph c](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073476/Part%204:%20Chapter%202%20-%20Flight%20and%20Correspondence%20Training#203c) below) 

3. The concurrent enrollment in commercial pilot certification and instrument rating courses is the only exception where VA will award education benefits for concurrent enrollments in vocational flight training courses. 

4. If a student is pursuing a flight degree at an Institution of Higher Learning (IHL), instrument rating can either be taken prior to commercial pilot or in conjunction with commercial pilot as long as both are addressed in the program outline. 

**b. Flight Instructor And Flight Instructor Instrument Courses** 

1. Flight instructor ratings may be obtained in six categories: airplane single-engine, airplane multiengine, rotorcraft helicopter, rotorcraft gyroplane, powered-lift, and glider. If a student has a flight instructor rating in one category, he or she may receive benefits for an additional flight instructor rating in another category. 

2. Flight instructor instrument ratings may be obtained in three categories: airplane, helicopter, and powered lift. If a student has a flight instructor instrument rating in one category, he or she may receive benefits for an additional flight instructor instrument rating in another category. 

**c. Ground Instructor Courses** 

1. Effective August 4, 1997, students may receive benefits for a ground instructor course.  Students are not required to have a private pilot certificate or a second-class medical certificate to receive benefits for a ground instructor course. 

There are three ratings: basic, advanced, and instrument. Students holding a basic ground instructor certificate may receive benefits for an advanced or instrument rating. 

2. Students who have completed two or more years of study at a college or university in a degree program in education may receive up to ten hours of credit upon enrolling in a ground instructor course. 

**d. Flight Engineer Courses** 

1. The FAA endorses only one flight engineer certificate. The FAA will issue endorsements to the certificate for the aircraft on which the engineer is qualified to serve. In addition to students having a flight engineer certificate, students may receive benefits for additional add-on training for an endorsement. 

2. Students who were flight engineers while on active duty cannot convert their military experience to a civilian certificate unless they take and pass the FAA examination. If a student who was a flight engineer requests benefits for a flight engineer course within one year of their release from active duty, request a copy of the FAA notice showing that they did not pass the examination.

****

**2.04 ENROLLMENT CERTIFICATION** (Change 17, January 13, 2021)

---

**a. Completion of Enrollment Certification.** Flight schools and flight training centers must complete the following fields on [VA Form 22-1999](https://www.vba.va.gov/pubs/forms/VBA-22-1999c-ARE.pdf) or electronically in VA Online Certification of Enrollment System (VA-ONCE), for a student pursuing vocational flight training. 

1. **Credit Allowed for Previous Training**.  Flight schools and flight training centers must show flight credit granted as hours of instruction or ratings held by the student. (See [paragraph 2.06](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073476/Part%204:%20Chapter%202%20-%20Flight%20and%20Correspondence%20Training#206)) 

2. **Date Training Began in Current Course.** Flight schools and flight training centers must report the actual day the student enrolled in the current flight course. 

3. **Number of Hours of Instruction.**  Flight schools and flight training centers must enter the actual number of hours of dual and solo flight training, preflight briefings, postflight critiques, and ground school training required for the rating. 

4. **Total Charges.**  Flight schools and flight training centers must enter the total charges for the training. 

5. **Remarks.** Flight schools and flight training centers must enter the name and date of the student’s medical certificate in the Remarks field. 

**b. Approval Review.** Veteran Claims Examiners (VCEs) must review the flight school or flight training center records in Web Enabled Approval Management System (WEAMS) before processing any awards. 

1. Compare the number of hours of training (dual and solo flight training, preflight briefings, postflight critiques, and ground school) certified with the hours in WEAMS. The number of hours certified cannot exceed the number of hours shown in WEAMS. 

2. Compare the total charges computed by the flight school or flight training center with the total charges in WEAMS. The total charges on the certification must be less than or equal to the total charges in WEAMS. 

3. If the entries on the enrollment certification are greater than those in WEAMS, refer the case to the Education Liaison Representative (ELR) of jurisdiction. The ELR will determine if an approval revision is pending and advise the VCE of the status of the approval. If there is an approval revision pending, the VCE should diary the case for 30 days. When the diary matures, the VCE will review WEAMS and contact the ELR if a revised approval has not been received. 

4. If the entries on the certification are greater than those in WEAMS and a revision is not pending, disallow the claim. Send a detailed letter to the student with copies to the State Approving Agency and the ELR of jurisdiction. Explain that the course as certified by the flight school or flight training center is not approved. The denial letter must include appropriate notice of appellate rights. 

**c. Concurrent Enrollments.** If students are concurrently enrolled in commercial pilot and instrument rating courses, flight schools or flight training centers must submit two enrollment certifications, one for the commercial pilot course and one for the instrument rating course. VCEs must check the hours of training and total charges on both enrollment certifications.  

1. For all awards processed in the Flight, On-the-Job Training, Correspondence, Apprenticeship System (FOCAS) and in the Long Term Solution (LTS) when the approved flight program includes commercial pilot and instrument rating as a single program in WEAMS: 

If the information on both enrollment certifications agrees with the information in WEAMS, VCEs should combine the hours of training and enter one award. Add the entries in the dual, ground, preflight briefings and postflight critiques, and total charges on the two enrollment certifications. Use course code 341 to identify concurrent enrollment cases. 

2. For awards processed in LTS when the commercial pilot and instrument rating are approved in WEAMS as separate programs: 

If the information on both enrollment certifications agrees with the information in WEAMS, VCEs should enter the awards separately in LTS using the applicable course codes.

****

**2.05 FLIGHT OBJECTIVES** (Change 17, January 13, 2021)

---

**a. Review of Application.** Veteran Claims Examiners (VCEs) must review applications for flight training to ensure students have appropriate flight training objectives. If a student's objective is unclear, the school should work with the student to develop a program to ensure the student is not requesting training for ancillary, vocational, or recreational purposes. 

1. Students’ applications must include all courses required to reach the flight program training objectives. However, a student may request a course not originally listed on his or her application without incurring a change of program. (See [paragraph 2.07](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073476/Part%204:%20Chapter%202%20-%20Flight%20and%20Correspondence%20Training#207)) 

2. Although a program of vocational flight training may include more than one course, a student may not enroll concurrently for two or more courses with one exception. (See [paragraph 2.03a(1)](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073476/Part%204:%20Chapter%202%20-%20Flight%20and%20Correspondence%20Training#203a1) above) 

3. A student must take courses in sequence. The student must complete the commercial pilot certification course before taking advanced courses leading to other certificates or ratings with one exception. (See [paragraph 2.03a(2)](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073476/Part%204:%20Chapter%202%20-%20Flight%20and%20Correspondence%20Training#203a2) above) 

**b. Examples.** Some examples of course combinations for flight objectives are: 

Objective 1:  Commercial Pilot

Courses –Commercial pilot certification, instrument rating, and multi-engine. 

Objective 2:  Airline Pilot

Courses – Commercial pilot certification, instrument rating, air transport pilot (ATP), and turbojet type rating. 

Objective 3:  Flight Instructor

Courses – Commercial pilot certification and any other course (except an ATP course) the student needs to qualify to teach plus the instructor course. If the student's objective is flight instructor, allow an ATP course only if the student's prospective employer specifically requires both the ATP and instructor courses. Otherwise, charge a change of program if the student takes both courses. (See [paragraph 2.07](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073476/Part%204:%20Chapter%202%20-%20Flight%20and%20Correspondence%20Training#207)p) 

Objective 4:  Aerial Applicator Pilot (crop-dusting aircraft pilot)

Courses – Commercial pilot certification and agricultural aircraft operations. 

Objective 5:  Helicopter or Rotor Craft Pilot

Course – Commercial pilot certification (helicopter) 

Objective 6:  Flight Engineer.

Course – Flight engineer certificate. 

***NOTE 1****: These objectives are illustrations of **possible** course combinations. A flight program may include additional courses required to fly or teach the type of aircraft the student plans to use in his or her vocation. For example, if the student plans to fly turbojet aircraft, the program must include a turbojet type rating course. If there is any doubt that a student's objective requires a particular course, refer the case to the Education Liaison Representative (ELR). The ELR will contact the local Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) district office.*

**c. Optional Ratings as Appropriate Objectives.**  Students may be eligible for approval for glider, free balloon, or aerobatics courses leading to vocational objectives.

1. Students requesting a commercial pilot certification course for glider or free balloon must show that the purpose for taking the course is vocational rather than avocational or recreational. This requirement also applies to an aerobatics course. Students must submit evidence to support his or her claim. The evidence may include statements from flight schools or prospective employers.

2. If a student with a commercial pilot certificate (glider) requests a flight instructor (glider) course, VCEs should approve the request without further development.  Veterans Affairs (VA) presumes the purpose in taking the course is vocational.

3. The commercial pilot certification course is the only free balloon course the State Approving Agency (SAA) may approve. The student may show a final objective of either commercial pilot or flight instructor. The holder of a commercial pilot certificate (free balloon) may teach free ballooning.

**d. Add-On Courses.** A student with a commercial pilot certificate (helicopter) may request a commercial pilot certificate course (single or multi-engine land). The student may request a regular commercial pilot certificate (single or multi-engine land) course or a special add-on course for a single or multi-engine land rating.

1. If the student enrolls in a regular commercial pilot certificate course (single or multi-engine land), the school must grant appropriate credit and shorten the course accordingly.  Even if the flight school or flight training center grants credit, this method usually requires more hours and is more expensive than enrolling in an add-on course for the rating.

2. A flight school or flight training center offering an approved add-on course for an aircraft rating should not enroll a student in the regular commercial pilot course. The only exception is if the regular course is less expensive after granting credit for previous training.

**e.** For flight training at an Institution of Higher Learning (IHL) the student must follow the program outline and the pre-requisites listed.  If the program is fully contracted with a vocational flight program, then the student is held to the pattern listed above in the general method of pursuit.  If the IHL is operating under [14 CFR Part 61](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=8532b9e0986c3bcbc2a2e44d58fa9008&mc=true&node=pt14.2.61&rgn=div5) then the IHL must adhere to the general course progression as listed in [Part 61](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=8532b9e0986c3bcbc2a2e44d58fa9008&mc=true&node=pt14.2.61&rgn=div5).

****

**2.06 CREDIT FOR PRIOR TRAINING** (Original, September 22, 1992)

---

A flight school [and flight training center] must grant credit for previous training and shorten a flight course for VA purposes. If a student transfers from one flight school [or flight training center] to another, the receiving school [or  training center] determines the credit to grant.

**a. Review.** Adjudicators should review the student's application, military record, and other VA training to determine what aviation experience or flight training the student had. Develop for credit for prior training when the school [or training center] does not grant credit or grants inadequate credit.

**b. FAA Requirements.** Under FAR 141.77, full course credit may transfer from one certified flight school to another certified flight school. The receiving school must give the student a flight check or written test. The school may credit a student with [50 percent or more] of the course requirements based on previous pilot experience and knowledge.

****

**2.07 CHANGES OF PROGRAM VOCATIONAL**(Change, January 27, 2021)

---

A change of program is a change in the educational or vocational objective that requires a change in courses required to meet the flight training objective.

**a. Prerequisites.** If a flight course is a prerequisite or is required for pursuit of another flight course, do not charge a change of program upon entry into the advanced course.

**b. Transfers.** A student may change his or her flight training objectives without incurring a change of program. However, substantially all completed training must transfer to the new program. The length (in hours) of the new program should not exceed the length (in hours) of the previous program.

**c. Change of School.** A transfer from one flight school or flight training center to another does not require a change of program if the new flight school or flight training center program leads to the same objective. There cannot be a material loss of credit or an increase in the length of the program.

****

**2.08 ALREADY QUALIFIED AND REFRESHER FLIGHT TRAINING VOCATIONAL AND NON-COLLEGE DEGREE** (Change 13 January 2021)

---

**a. Already Qualified.**  A former military pilot with the military equivalent of a commercial pilot certificate and an instrument rating may obtain a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) commercial pilot certificate and an instrument rating without taking the flight examinations. A military pilot within 12 months from his or her release from active duty flying status may apply to the FAA for the ratings.  If a student files a claim for benefits for commercial pilot or instrument training during the first 12 months following his or her release from active duty, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) must send a detailed denial letter to the student explaining why this flight training is not approved, including their right to appeal the decision.

**b. Refresher Training.**  In the situation when an individual held an FAA certificate before or during active duty, and surrendered the certificate or the FAA canceled the certificate, the individual may be entitled to receive benefits for training that will qualify him or her for the same certificate.  A Reservist receiving benefits under chapter 1606 is not eligible for refresher training unless he or she was previously on active duty.

**C. Refresher training at an Institution of Higher Learning (IHL).**  Refresher flight can only be taken at a vocational training facility offering the training certifications.  It is not authorized at IHLs. 

****

**2.09  NON-REIMBURSABLE FLIGHT TRAINING** (Change 16, August 25, 1998)

---

**a. Before Effective Date.** If a student incurs charges for flight training before the beginning date of the award, do not reimburse the charges. Show these charges on the award in "Remarks." Include the number of hours and type of training (for example, dual flight training, [solo flight training,] preflight briefing, postflight critique, or ground school).

**b. Noninstructional Services.** Do not reimburse a student for non instructional services. Some flight schools  [and flight training centers] offer "free" amenities to students such as lodging accommodations for out-of-town students. The schools [and training centers] may include the cost of services such as transportation to and from the school [and training center], lodging, and preliminary or follow-up training in their normal charges for flight courses. In these situations, the course approvals must show reimbursable charges representing only the cost of tuition and fees for actual instruction.

****

**2.10  COMBINATION COLLEGE DEGREE – FLIGHT TRAINING PROGRAMS** (Change 17, January 27, 2021)

---

**a. College Degrees.****.** Students receiving benefits under any Veterans Affairs educational program may receive approval to pursue flight training courses that are part of an approved standard college degree programs.   

1. All students must have a  second-class medical certificate prior to the approval and start of any flight training program, unless the training is conducted under [FAR Part 61](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?c=ecfr&sid=40760189a03dfea0b501608f33820a45&rgn=div5&view=text&node=14:2.0.1.1.2&idno=14).  Students do not have to take flight courses in the order specified in [subparagraph 2.03a (2).](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073476/Part%204:%20Chapter%202%20-%20Flight%20and%20Correspondence%20Training#203)

2. A student may receive benefits for private pilot certification provided the course is listed under [14 CFR Part 141](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073476/Part%204:%20Chapter%202%20-%20Flight%20and%20Correspondence%20Training#203) as an approved part of the standard college degree the student is pursing, or is listed as in house [14 CFR Part 61](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=8532b9e0986c3bcbc2a2e44d58fa9008&mc=true&node=pt14.2.61&rgn=div5) training and approved by the State Approving Agency (SAA).

3. Flight schools and flight training centers, under contract with colleges or universities, may only provide flight training for all programs above private pilot and must be identified on their [Part 141](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073476/Part%204:%20Chapter%202%20-%20Flight%20and%20Correspondence%20Training#203) Air Agency Certificate

4. The degree requirements must specifically identify the required number flight hours for each flight course in the school catalog. Training beyond the degree requirements is vocational.  Students under chapters 30, 32, 33 and 1606, may interrupt their college program and receive reimbursement for flight training above the private pilot level at a flight school or flight training center.  The student may return to college training without being charged with a change of program if they meet all of the following conditions:

[i.] The flight training pursued at the flight school or flight training center does not exceed the amount required for the degree.

[ii.] The college or university grants full credit for the flight course(s) in partial fulfillment of the degree requirements.

[iii.] Students continue to pursue the same degree programs.

**b. Chapter 35.** Students using education benefits under chapter 35 and trainees under section 901 of Public Law 96-342 will not receive reimbursement for vocational flight training.  In accordance with [38 USC    3680 A (b.)](https://www.govregs.com/uscode/38/3680A), except to the extent otherwise specifically provided in this title or chapter 106 of title 10, the Secretary shall not approve the enrollment of an eligible Veteran in any course of flight training other than one given by an educational institution of higher learning for credit toward a standard college degree the eligible Veteran is seeking.

****

**2.11  FLIGHT AWARD AND MONTHLY CERTIFICATION OF FLIGHT TRAINING PROCEDURES** (Change 16, August 25, 1998)

---

**a. Award Processing.** For procedures on how to complete award forms for flight training and how to charge entitlement for flight training completed, see the following references:

1. For chapter 30 flight award processing, see [Part 05, Chapter 30. Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000076293?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&). Refer to [M22-4: Part 4- Chapter 1 Enrollment Certification 1.19](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073421/Part-4-Chapter-1-Enrollment-Certification) for Out of System (OOS) and Benefits Manager processing.

2. For chapter 32 and section 903 flight award processing, see [Part 6: Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073576?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&).

3. For chapter 1606 flight award processing, see [Part 8: Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000075562?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&). Refer to [M22-4: Part 4- Chapter 1 Enrollment Certification 1.19](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073421/Part-4-Chapter-1-Enrollment-Certification) for Out of System (OOS) and Benefits Manager processing.  

**b. Monthly Certification of Flight Training Processing.** For procedures on processing VA Forms 22-6553c or 22-6553c-1, see [Part 3: Chapter 8 - Periodic Education Certifications](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000076131?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&).

****

 

**SUBCHAPTER 2. CORRESPONDENCE TRAINING**

**2.12 GENERAL** (Original, September 22, 1992)

---

This subchapter provides procedures for processing education benefit claims for correspondence training.

****

**2.13 ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR CORRESPONDENCE TRAINING** (Original, September 22, 1992)

---

**a. Chapter 30.** Chapter 30 trainees may receive reimbursement at the 55 percent rate for training beginning October 28, 1986.

**b. Chapter 32.** Chapter 32 trainees may receive reimbursement at the 100 percent rate for training beginning January 1, 1987.

**c. Chapter 35 Children.** Chapter 35 children may not receive benefits for correspondence training.

**d. Chapter 35 Spouses.** Chapter 35 spouses may receive reimbursement at the 55 percent rate for training beginning September 30, 1981.

**e. Chapter 1606.** Chapter 1606 trainees may receive reimbursement at the 55 percent rate for training beginning September 30, 1990.

**f. Section 901.** Section 901 trainees may not receive benefits for correspondence training.

**g. Section 903.** Section 903 trainees may receive reimbursement at the 100 percent rate for training beginning January 1, 1987.

****

**2.14 ENROLLMENT CERTIFICATION** (Change 16, August 25, 1998)

---

**a. Completion of Enrollment Certification.** The school must complete the following [fields] on VA Form 22-1999 for a student pursuing correspondence courses.

1. [ ] Credit Allowed for Previous Training. The school must show credit for previous training in terms of lessons.

2. [ ] Date First Lesson Sent to Student.

3. [ ] Number of Lessons for Which Student Is Enrolled.

4. [ ] Charge Per Lesson to Student.

5. [ ] Were Any Lessons Serviced Before The Date Entered in Date Signed Block? The school must check either "Yes" or "No." If the school checks "Yes," it must attach a list showing each lesson and the date serviced. The school may enter the information in remarks.

**b. Approval Review.** Adjudicators must review [the school’s record on OLAF] before processing awards. [ ]

1. Compare the number of lessons and cost per lesson certified against [the OLAF record].  If the school's entries are less than the approved charges, accept the certification.

2. If the number of lessons or cost per lesson on the certification are greater than that shown on [the OLAF record], refer the case to the ELR at the RO of jurisdiction. The ELR will determine if there is an approval revision pending and advise the adjudicator of the status of the approval. If there is an approval revision pending, the adjudicator should diary the case for 30 days. When the diary matures, the adjudicator should review the OLAF record] and contact the ELR if a revised approval has not been received.

*NOTE: Adjudicators at an RPO should refer approval questions to their ELR at the RPO, who will contact the ELR at the RO of jurisdiction to determine whether there is [a pending approval revision].*

3. If the entries on the certification are greater than those on [the OLAF record] and a revision is not pending, disallow the claim. Send a dictated letter to the student with copies to the school, the SAA, and the ELR [ ] of jurisdiction. Explain that the course as certified by the correspondence school is not approved. Enclose VA Form 1-4107.

****

**2.15  AFFIRMATION OF ENROLLMENT** (Original, September 22, 1992)

---

*See* [RPO Letter 22-08-41](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000061960?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)*, Paragraph 3.*

**a. General.** VA will not pay for correspondence training unless the student affirms the enrollment contract after a 10-day "cooling-off" period. During this period, both the student and the school have the right to cancel the contract. A student must complete VA Form 22-1999c, Certificate of Affirmation of Enrollment Agreement - Correspondence Course, to confirm an enrollment contract.

**b. Computing the “Cooling-Off” Period.** Do not count the date the student signs the enrollment agreement as the first day of the 10-day period. The following examples show how to compute the 10-day period:

Calculating the "Cooling-Off Period"

|  |  |
| --- | --- |
| **Date Enrollment Agreement Signed** | **Earliest Date of Affirmation** |
| 1 | 12 |
| 7 | 18 |
| 10 | 21 |
| 20 (of a 31-day month) | 31 |
| 20 (of a 30-day month) | 1 (of the following month) |

**c. Failure to Affirm.** If a student does not affirm the enrollment contract but completes lessons and the school services them, VA will not pay for them at any time. If the student later submits an affirmation, VA will not pay for any lessons serviced before the date the student signs the affirmation.

**d. Lessons Services During “Cooling-Off Period.** VA will not pay for any lessons serviced by a school during the 10-day cooling-off period.

**e. Premature [Affirmations].** If a student submits an affirmation signed before the 10-day period, advise the student to submit another affirmation. Do not process the award until the student submits an affirmation signed after the 10-day period. VA may pay for lessons serviced after the date the student signed the initial affirmation if:

1. The school serviced them after the 10th day, and

2. The affirmation states that no one coerced the student to sign it.

EXAMPLE: A student signs the affirmation on the 9th day. Since the 10-day period did not expire, the affirmation is invalid. The student does lessons and the school services them. VA advises the student to submit another affirmation. VA may pay for lessons serviced after the 10th day if the student signs another affirmation. Signing the affirmation on the 9th day represented a good faith effort to follow the law.

**f. Coercion.** VA will not pay for any lessons if evidence shows that someone coerced the student to sign the affirmation and the affirmation must state that no one coerced the student to sign. If it is determined that coercion was involved, advise the student that VA will not make payments. Enclose VA Form 1-4107.

****

**2.16 [CREDIT FOR PRIOR TRAINING AND NON-REIMBURSABLE LESSONS** (Change 16, August 25, 1998)

---

**a. General.** To properly pay for correspondence courses, it is essential that adjudicators understand the difference between prior credit lessons and non-reimbursable lessons

1. Prior Credit Lessons. A correspondence school must reduce the length of a course by the number of lessons that the student received credit based on previous education and training. The school should show the number of lessons credited in the Credit for Prior Training field and the number of lessons remaining in the Number of Lessons for Which Student is Enrolled field on the enrollment certification.

2. Non-Reimbursable Lessons. A student is not entitled to benefits for lessons completed before he or she signs the affirmation. The lessons are part of the program and must be completed for the student to complete the course.

**b. Differences in Award Processing.** There are important differences between the entries on correspondence awards when prior credit lessons and non-reimbursable lessons are an issue.

1. Prior Credit Lessons. Enter the total number of lessons authorized excluding the number of lessons that the student received credit.

EXAMPLE: A school grants a student credit for 10 lessons based upon the student’s previous education in a course approved for 60 lessons. The school should enter “10” in the Credit for Prior Training field and “50” in the Number of Lessons for Which Student is Enrolled field on the enrollment certification. The adjudicator should enter “50” as the number of lessons in the course.

2. Non-Reimbursable Lessons. Enter the total number of lessons in the course.

EXAMPLE: A student completes 7 lessons in a 75 lesson course before signing the affirmation. The school should enter “75” in the Number of Lessons for Which Student is Enrolled field, check “Yes” block in the Were Any Lessons Serviced Before The Date Entered in Date Signed Block field, and enter the number of lessons serviced and the date(s) the lessons were serviced in Remarks. The adjudicator should enter “75” as the number of lessons in the course.

i. For chapter 35 trainees, enter the number of non-reimbursable lessons in the NON-REIMBURSABLE LESSONS field on the BDN 313 Correspondence Award screen.

ii. For chapter 32 and 1606 trainees, enter the number of non-reimbursable lessons in the Remarks section on VA Form 22-1997, Education Award.

iii. For chapter 30 trainees, enter the number of non-reimbursable lessons in the NON-REIMB LESSONS field of the correspondence award screen in the chapter 30 PC system.

****

**2.17 CORRESPONDENCE AWARD AND CERTIFICATION OF LESSONS COMPLETED PROCEDURES** (Change 16, August 25, 1998)

---

For procedures on how to complete BDN screens or award forms for correspondence courses and how to charge entitlement for lessons completed, see the following references. For procedures on processing VA Form 22-6553b, Certification of Lessons Completed, see part III, chapter 8.

**a. Chapter 30 Correspondence Award Processing.** See [Part 05, Chapter 30. Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000076293?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&).

**b. Chapter 32 and Section 903 Correspondence Award Processing.** See [Part 6: Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073576?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&).

**c. Chapter 35 Correspondence Award Processing.** See  [Part 7: Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073737?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&).

**d. Chapter 1606 Correspondence Award Processing**

****

 

**SUBCHAPTER 3. LICENSING AND CERTIFICATION (LAC), NATIONAL EXAMINATIONS, AND PREPARATORY COURSES**

---

**2.18  General.**This subchapter introduces LAC, national examinations, and preparatory courses and provides instructions for processing requests for reimbursement of fees for approved LAC tests, national examinations, and preparatory courses.

****

**2.19  Definitions**

1. **License**. Test offered by a local, state, or federal agency required by law in order to practice an occupation. Some states may refer to such tests as "certification" tests.  Examples would include travel agent, make-up artist, and unarmed security guard.
2. **Certification**. Test designed to provide an affirmation of an individual’s qualifications in a specified occupation. Certification is not required to practice an occupation except where the occupational licensing requirements include certification as part of those requirements. Examples would include auto service, medical billing, pharmacy, and computer systems.
3. **National Examination**. National tests for college admission (e.g., SAT, ACT, TOEFL), to earn college credit (e.g., AP, CLEP, DSST, ECE, PLA), for graduate school admission (e.g., GMAT, GRE, LSAT, MAT), and pre-health professional program admission (e.g., DAT, MCAT, OAT, PCAT).
4. **Preparatory Course**. Preparatory course designed to prepare beneficiaries for LAC tests. Preparatory course reimbursement is under Post-9/11 GI Bill (PGIB or chapter 33) and Survivors’ and Dependents’ Educational Assistance (DEA or chapter 35).
5. **Organization Offering a Test**. An organization that offers a test is authorized to grant a license or certification to successful test takers. An offering organization may be the owner of a test, but ownership is not a prerequisite, as long as the test owner grants the offering organization the authority to license or certificate. Moreover, an organization that only administers or proctors a test is not an offering organization because it lacks the authority to license or certificate.

****

**2.20  Background**

1. **Public Law 106-419**, “Veterans Benefits and Health Care Improvement Act of 2000”.  Allows reimbursement of LAC fees under Montgomery GI Bill (MGIB or chapter 30) ([38 U.S. Code 3032](https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=38+usc+3032&f=treesort&fq=true&num=21&hl=true&edition=prelim&granuleId=USC-prelim-title38-section3032)) and chapter 35 ([38 U.S. Code 3532](https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=%22national+test%22&f=treesort&fq=true&num=7&hl=true&edition=prelim&granuleId=USC-prelim-title38-section3532)).
2. **Public Law 109-163**, “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2006’’. Allows reimbursement of LAC fees under Montgomery GI Bill – Selected Reserve (MGIB-SR or chapter 1606) ([10 U.S. Code 16131](https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=10+usc+16131&f=treesort&fq=true&num=6&hl=true&edition=prelim&granuleId=USC-prelim-title10-section16131)).
3. **Public Law 110-252**, “Supplemental Appropriations Act, 2008”.  Allows reimbursement of LAC fees under chapter 33 ([38 U.S. Code 3315](https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?hl=false&edition=prelim&req=granuleid%3AUSC-prelim-title38-section3315&f=treesort&fq=true&num=0&saved=%7CIm5hdGlvbmFsIHRlc3Qi%7CdHJlZXNvcnQ%3D%7CdHJ1ZQ%3D%3D%7C6%7Ctrue%7Cprelim)).
4. **Public Law 111-377**, “Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act of 2010”.  Allows reimbursement of national examination fees under chapter 33 ([38 U.S. Code 3315A](https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?hl=false&edition=prelim&req=granuleid%3AUSC-prelim-title38-section3315A&f=treesort&fq=true&num=0&saved=%7CIm5hdGlvbmFsIHRlc3Qi%7CdHJlZXNvcnQ%3D%7CdHJ1ZQ%3D%3D%7C6%7Ctrue%7Cprelim)).
5. **Public Law 116-154**, “Ryan Kules and Paul Benne Specially Adaptive Housing Improvement Act of 2019”. Allows reimbursement of LAC and national examination preparatory course fees under chapter 33 ([38 U.S. Code 3315B](https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?hl=false&edition=prelim&req=granuleid%3AUSC-prelim-title38-section3315B&f=treesort&fq=true&num=0&saved=%7CIm5hdGlvbmFsIHRlc3Qi%7CdHJlZXNvcnQ%3D%7CdHJ1ZQ%3D%3D%7C6%7Ctrue%7Cprelim)) and chapter 35 ([38 U.S. Code 3532(g)](https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=%22national+test%22&f=treesort&fq=true&num=7&hl=true&edition=prelim&granuleId=USC-prelim-title38-section3532)) for approved courses beginning on or after August 1, 2021.

****

**2.21  Forms Management**

1. “**Request for Reimbursement of Licensing or Certification Test Fees**” (VA Form 22-0803).  Form used to request reimbursement of licensing or certification test fees. Document type “LAC” will be used in The Image Management System (TIMS).
2. “**Request for Reimbursement of National Exam Fee**” (VA Form 22-0810). Form used to request reimbursement of national examination fees. Document type “LAC” will be used in TIMS.
3. “**Application for Reimbursement of Preparatory Course for Licensing or Certification Test**” (VA Form 22-10272). Form used to request reimbursement for preparatory courses. Document type “10272” will be used in TIMS.

****

**2.22  Eligibility Criteria**

1. Beneficiary must be eligible for the benefit they are requesting reimbursement under on the day they take the test/examination or on the day they enrolled in the preparatory course.
2. Beneficiary must have remaining entitlement and have not reached their delimiting date on the day they take the test/examination or on the day they complete the preparatory course.
3. LACs, national examinations, and preparatory courses must be approved in WEAMS.

**NOTE:** LAC, national examination, and preparatory course approval and fee information from WEAMS will be captured to TIMS.

4. LAC and national examination applications for reimbursement must be received within one (1) year from date of test.
5. Preparatory course applications for reimbursement must be received within one (1) year from completion of course.

****

**2.23  Application and Documentation**

a.   **LAC or National Examination**. Must include the following:

* VA Form 22-0803 (LAC) or VA Form 22-0810 (national examination) with beneficiary’s identification information, test/examination information, and chosen education benefit.
* Copy of individual test/examination results or copy of certificate of completion.
* Copy of receipt or proof of payment showing charged fees.

b.   **Preparatory Course**.  Must include the following:

* VA Form 22-10272 with beneficiary’s identification information, associated licensing or certification test information, and preparatory course information.
* Copy of itemized receipt from the course provider with course costs and fees.
* Verification of enrollment from the course provider with course name and enrollment term.

**NOTE**: Processors are required to develop for missing information using PCGL DEV-17 (LACAS Development Letter) and suspend the claim for 30 days. If no new or material evidence has been received within 30 days, then the claim for reimbursement will be denied.

c.   **Preparatory Course Job Aid.**

* The Job Aid is used to determine the amount reimbursable based on the cost of course and remaining entitlement.
* Since DGI and BM do not have the option to process a preparatory course, the job aid will provide the processor with the amounts needed for entry into DGI and BM manual award.
* Processors will follow the instructions listed inside the job aid.

d.   **Correspondence**.

* The various Education letters cited in this article can be found in the Personal Computer Generated Letter (PCGL) Central letter repository.
* System payment letters or locally produced PCGL payment/award letters will include the information from one of the following insert templates to document payment and remaining entitlement:

****

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **What We Did**  We have issued a licensing and certification (LAC) test and/or national examination reimbursement payment for [ **$350.00** ] based on the information you submitted with your request. You should receive this payment soon.   |  |  |  |  | | --- | --- | --- | --- | | **Name of Test** | **Date of Test or Examination** | **Approved Cost** | **Submitted Cost** | | *“Test”* | Jan 1, 2025 | $100.00 | $100.00 | | *“Exam”* | Feb 1, 2025 | $250.00 | $250.00 | |  |  |  |  |     **Your Remaining Benefits (Chapter 33)**  As of (end date of course), you have used XX month(s) and XX day(s) of benefits. You have XX month(s) and XX day(s) of benefits remaining. You have no time limit to use your education benefits under the Post-9/11 GI Bill (38 USC 3321).  *OR*  As of (end date of course), you have used XX month(s) and XX day(s) of benefits. You have XX month(s) and XX day(s) remaining under Post-9/11 GI Bill to use before (delimiting date)    **Your Remaining Benefits (Chapter 35)**  As of (end date of course), you have used XX month(s) and XX day(s) of benefits. You have XX month(s) and XX day(s) of benefits remaining. You have no time limit to use your education benefits under Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA) program (38 CFR 21.7050) (38 CFR 21.7076).  *OR*  As of (end date of course), you have used XX month(s) and XX day(s) of benefits. You have XX month(s) and XX day(s) remaining under Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA) program to use before (delimiting date) (38 CFR 21.7050) (38 CFR 21.7076). |

****

***Figure 1****:  Typical LAC/National Examination payment/entitlement insert.*

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **What We Did**  We have issued a licensing and certification (LAC) test preparatory course reimbursement payment for $850.00 based on the information you submitted with your request. You should receive this payment soon.:   |  |  |  |  |  | | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | | **Name of Course** | **Course Date(s)** | | **Approved Cost** | **Submitted Cost** | | **Begin** | **End** | | *“Course”* | Feb 10, 2025 | Feb 14, 2025 | $500.00 | $600.00 | | *“Course”* | Feb 17, 2025 | Feb 19, 2025 | $250.00 | $250.00 | |  |  |  |  |  |     **Your Remaining Benefits (Chapter 33)**  As of (end date of course), you have used XX month(s) and XX day(s) of benefits. You have XX month(s) and XX day(s) of benefits remaining. You have no time limit to use your education benefits under the Post-9/11 GI Bill (38 USC 3321).    *OR*  As of (end date of course), you have used XX month(s) and XX day(s) of benefits. You have XX month(s) and XX day(s) remaining under Post-9/11 GI Bill to use before (delimiting date)  ****  **Your Remaining Benefits (Chapter 35)**  As of (end date of course), you have used XX month(s) and XX day(s) of benefits. You have XX month(s) and XX day(s) of benefits remaining. You have no time limit to use your education benefits under Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA) program (38 CFR 21.7050) (38 CFR 21.7076).  *OR*  As of (end date of course), you have used XX month(s) and XX day(s) of benefits. You have XX month(s) and XX day(s) remaining under Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA) program to use before (delimiting date) (38 CFR 21.7050) (38 CFR 21.7076). |

***Figure 2****:  Typical LAC preparatory course payment/entitlement insert.*

****

**2.24  Payment and Entitlement Rules**

a.   **LAC**

* VA will pay for the cost of a LAC, up to $2000 VA may not reimburse for registration fees, preparation guides, processing fees, etc.
* Cannot pay for tests taken before March 1, 2001.
* Test must be taken within one (1) year of date of application.

b.   **National Examination**

* VA will pay for the cost of an examination, including registration fees, fees for specialized tests, and administrative fees.
* Cannot pay for tests taken before December 10, 2004.
* Test must be taken within one (1) year of date of application.

c.   **Preparatory Course**

* VA will pay for the cost of the course, including registration and administrative fees.
* Cannot pay for courses taken before August 1, 2021.
* Last day of course must be within one (1) year of date of application.

d.   **Charged Entitlement**

* Chapter 33
  + Tests taken prior to August 1, 2011 – no entitlement was charged.
  + Tests taken on/after August 1, 2011 - one month of entitlement was charged (rounded to the nearest WHOLE month) for each $1,759.08 paid.  Since the law required entitlement to be rounded to the nearest whole month, one month of entitlement was charged per test.
  + Tests taken on/after August 1, 2018 - entitlement charge are prorated based on the actual amount of the fee charged for the test up to the yearly rate for one month.

NOTE: Beneficiaries with less than one month of entitlement remaining will have their payment prorated based on the number of days of remaining entitlement.

* Non-33: Entitlement is charged for each test by dividing the amount of the test payment by the beneficiary’s full-time institutional rate (including kicker, payment for additional dependents, or additional contributions).

d.   **Multiple Benefit Processing**

* Under multiple sources, the beneficiary will not be reimbursed for more than the lesser of what is being charged or what has been approved in WEAMS.
* If a test, examination, or course causes entitlement to be exhausted under one benefit without the full cost being reimbursed, the remaining reimbursement amount can be paid under another benefit.
* When calculating entitlement using the preparatory course job aid after the first benefit is exhausted, the second job aid will only cite the unmet charges to accurately calculate charged entitlement under the second benefit.

****

**2.25  Reimbursement Procedures**

a.   Refer to **M22-4, Part 12, Chapter 3** and **Chapter 6** for detailed LAC and national examination processing under chapter 33.

b.   Refer to [**M22-1 Part VII, Subpart i, Chapter 3, Section F**](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000288916/M22-1-Part-VII-Subpart-i-Chapter-3-Section-F-Benefits-Manager-Enrollment-Processing)for detailed LAC and national examination processing under chapter 30, 35, and 1606.

c.   Refer to **2.26** below for detailed preparatory course reimbursement processing under chapter 33 and chapter 35.

****

**2.26  Reimbursement for Preparatory Courses**

Beneficiaries may apply for reimbursement of fees for approved preparatory courses under chapter 33 and chapter 35 effective August 1, 2021, using “Application for Reimbursement of Preparatory Course for Licensing or Certification Test” (VA Form 22-10272).

a.    **Eligibility for Reimbursement**.  VCE will review the following:

(1)   Benefit eligibility, remaining entitlement, and delimiting date of the benefits the beneficiary is requesting reimbursement under.

(2)   Application and Required Documentation

•     Information provided by the beneficiary must be complete and accurate (Parts I through IV).

•     Itemized receipt from the course provider must include course costs and fees.  This information must also be provided in block 12 of the application.

•     Verification of enrollment from the course provider must include course name and enrollment begin/start dates.  This information must also match the information in Part IV and/or block 13 of the application.

The itemized receipt and verification of enrollment from the course provider are required to process reimbursement claims. 

•     Develop using PCGL DEV-17 (LACAS Development Letter) if not provided.

•     Process as a failure to prosecute using PCGL DIS-3 (Failure to Prosecute) if the requested documentation is not received within 30 days.

(3)   **Claim Denial**.  When the claim is denied, the processor will send the PCGL DIS-13 (Licensing and Certification Denial) to the beneficiary.  Reasons for denial include:

•     Preparatory course and/or LAC not approved in WEAMS

•     Course began prior to August 1, 2021

•     Application received greater than one year after course was completed

•     Preparatory course and/or LAC not approved in WEAMS

•     No longer eligible for chapter 33/chapter 35 (for example, exhausted entitlement or beyond delimiting date)

**NOTE**: If any information is missing, the processor is required to develop out using PCGL DEV-17 (LACAS Development letter) and suspend the claim for thirty days.

**NOTE**: PCGL DIS-13 (Licensing and Certification Denial) will require editing if the preparatory course is not approved; replace references to “LAC test” with “preparatory course.”

**NOTE**:PCGL DIS-17 (Disallowance – Benefit Not Indicated) will be used to deny the claim for reimbursement if the beneficiary is no longer eligible for chapter 33/chapter 35.

b.    **Chapter 33 DGI Award Processing**

**Step 1**     Create a Work Product (WP) and navigate to the Work Product Summary (WPS) tab.

**Step 2** Complete the Preparatory Course Job Aid:

•     Beneficiary information – full name, last four (XXX-XX-0000), Beneficiary status.

•     Entitlement information – available entitlement in whole months/days

•     Course information – course end date, charges, preparatory course rate (PGIB or DEA), WEAMS status, and WEAMS approval rate.

**Step 3**     Review job aid output and capture worksheet to TIMS.  Note the following:

•     Months to Charge/Days to Charge - Manual award amount (months/days) to enter as charged entitlement in DGI.

•     Reimbursement Amount – Prorated amount if there is not enough available entitlement to fully reimburse.

**Step 4**     Create and save a payment letter for authorizer review per local guidance.

**Step 5**     Go to the WPS “Manual Awards” section and click “Add Manual Award”.  After entering the following, click “Save.”

•     Type – “Charge Entitlement”

•     Effective Date – start date of the preparatory course

•     Entitlement – “DGI Manual Award Amount” from job aid calculation

•     Description – Name of the preparatory course

**Step 6**     Follow local authorization and fiscal processing procedures to release the reimbursement payment.  The payment letter with preparatory course reimbursement information will be released through DGI, or captured into TIMS if mailed by the authorizer.

c.    **Chapter 35 Benefits Manager (BM) Award Processing**

**Step 1**     Create a WP and navigate to the Entitlement tab. Select “Adjust manual entitlement”

**Step 2** Complete the Preparatory Course Job Aid:

•     Beneficiary information – full name, last four (XXX-XX-0000), Beneficiary status.

•     Entitlement information – available entitlement in whole months/days

•     Course information – course end date, charges, preparatory course rate (PGIB or DEA), WEAMS status, and WEAMS approval rate.

**Step 3**     Under Adjust manual entitlement

•     Enter date of claim as effective date

•     Select Charge entitlement under Adjustment type.

•     Select appropriate type of entitlement.

•     Under Entitlement amount, enter the used entitlement from the preparatory job aid.

•     Under Description, enter the name of the preparatory course and select Submit adjustment

**Step 6**     Follow local authorization and fiscal processing procedures to release the reimbursement payment.  The payment letter with preparatory course reimbursement information will be released through BM, or captured into TIMS if mailed by the authorizer.

**Go to Top**

---

SEE ATTACHMENT(S) BELOW