# Part XI: Chapter 9-Out-of-System Award Processing

**DRAFT: 6/5/06. IMPLEMENT AS ADVISED.**

**Part XI: Chapter 9 - Out-of-System Award Processing**

[**Subchapter I.** Interim Procedures of IHL and NCD Training](#SI)  
[9.01 Overview of Interim Processing (Historical)](#901)   
[9.02 Procedures (Historical)](#902)  
  
[**Subchapter II.**  Apprenticeship/OJT, Correspondence, and Flight Awards](#SII)  
[9.03 Award Processing for Apprenticeship/OJT, Correspondence, and Flight Awards](#903)

[9.04 Adjusting Chapter 1606 Out of System Awards](#904)

[**Appendix A** - Spreadsheet Instructions](#A)

**9.01 Overview**

---

This chapter gives procedures for processing Chapter 1607 claims that are processed outside of the Chapter 1607 BDN (Benefits Delivery Network) system. [Subchapter I](#SI) gives Interim payment procedures used for all Chapter 1607 cases that were processed before the Chapter 1607 BDN system was available. It is now of historical interest only. [Subchapter II](#SII)gives permanent procedures for handling apprenticeship/OJT (On-the Job), correspondence, and flight training awards and payments.

***NOTE:** All payments to the claimants during the interim period were generated by making one-time fiscal payments (transaction 06A) in the Chapter 34 BDN system. The 06A transactions were generated using the FIST and FAUT commands. Chapter 34 master records were not created as a result of these fiscal transactions. The only record in BDN of these fiscal transactions will be the payment history accessible through the TINQ (Treasury Inquiry) command. It is essential that the TIMS records created for cases processed during the interim procedure adequately document what was authorized since BDN records will not contain any master record history of these transactions. Direct deposit was not an option for the Chapter 34 system and therefore was not available during the interim period.*

[Go to Top](##Top)

>  

**SUBCHAPTER I. Interim Procedures for IHL and NCD Training**

 

**9.02 Procedures (Historical)**

---

*Caution: DoD and DHS make the eligibility determinations for Chapter 1607. VA claims examiners will not make eligibility determinations.*

**a. One-time Payment Policies**. See paragraph 2.02g.   

**b.** **Awards**. Use the 1607 Rate and Entitlement Calculation spreadsheet to prepare the Chapter 1607 award and to generate the amount due and the entitlement charge for the Chapter 1607 award lines.  Detailed instructions for the spreadsheet are in [Appendix A.](#A)  If we need to pay Chapter 1607 for a period for which Chapter 1606 has previously been paid, compute the 1607 net award amount separately as described in [subparagraph c](#902c) below and enter the Chapter 1606 overpayment on the spreadsheet.  Two separate fiscal payment transactions will be required for these cases: one for the payment to the veteran and the other to offset the Chapter 1606 overpayment.  Separate spreadsheets are required if the award covers enrollment periods where more than one type of training is involved or if there is any change to the person's service department or component.

***Note:** It is **very important** that the VCE (Veterans Claims Examiner) does NOT make entries in the CH 1607 06A date field or the CH 1606 DEBT 08E date field. The Senior VCE will input these dates upon authorization of the fiscal transaction(s).*  
  
Here are the procedures once the spreadsheet is completed:          

(1) The VCE should save the spreadsheet for each individual veteran to a shared drive at the RPO for review by the Senior VCE until the claim is authorized. When saving the completed spreadsheet, the VCE should select File (within EXCEL), select Save As, and then rename the spreadsheet using the claimant's stub-name and the last four digits of the social security number. Multiple spreadsheets per beneficiary may be necessary as stated above. When saving multiple spreadsheets, the VCE should save them as “stub name 1234 1 of 3” (for example “GDEARR 1234 1of 3”).

(2) The Rate and Entitlement Calculation spreadsheet generates a Recording Sheet spreadsheet which captures certain statistical information about each award. The Senior VCE should copy and paste the information from the Recording Sheet onto the 1607 Cost Code Report spreadsheet maintained at the RPO as described in [subparagraph d(1)(k**)**](#902d1k). This report is forwarded to Education Service each month as described in [paragraph f](#902f)  below.

**c. Adjusting Chapter 1606 Awards**. Here's how to handle Chapter 1607 claims for enrollment periods for which the claimant has already received Chapter 1606:

(1) If the claimant is requesting benefits for any enrollment period(s) paid under Chapter 1606, before adjusting the 1606 record the VCE should first capture the M01, M21, M22, and M23 screens covering the period being terminated. The VCE should use the STOP command and reason code 30 back to the first date from which Chapter 1607 is payable. It is important the BDN letter be suppressed when the Chapter 1606 award is terminated. The STOP command will create an overpayment (or A/R) in BDN; which, in most cases, will be a debt on paper only.

(2) If a debt is created, the VCE must enter the total dollar amount of the overpayment on the spreadsheet under “Previous Ch 1606 Award”; the spreadsheet calculates the balance due the claimant under Chapter 1607 and displays this amount as the “Net Award Due”. If the claimant previously received Chapter 1606 for the same enrollments now being paid under Chapter 1607, the removal of the duplicated periods will also restore the claimant’s entitlement under Chapter 1606. The amount of “original entitlement” input on the spreadsheet for Chapter 1607 must be the claimant’s amount of entitlement AFTER adjusting the Chapter 1606 record.

**Example:** A claimant used 15 months of Chapter 1606 entitlement. Five months of this is now restored because of award adjustment to pay Chapter 1607. The claimant now has used 10 months under Chapter 1606. Therefore, he should receive a full 36 months under Chapter 1607 (because 36 months of Ch. 1607 plus 10 months under Chapter 1606 is under the 48-month maximum for all benefits). On the Award Period Worksheet section, under “Entitlement”, "Orig Months" entered will be 36.

(3) If the claimant had an existing Chapter 1606 debt prior to this adjustment, the existing debt should be handled one of two ways:

(a) If the debt was created within the last 30 days, the claimant is still within his or her due process period; that debt must be noted prior to stopping the Chapter 1606 award and be subtracted from the new total debt created in BDN by the STOP action before inputting the dollar amount in the “Previous Ch 1606 Award” field on the spreadsheet. Since BDN will add any existing debt to the one being created, it’s important that the amount entered under “Previous Ch 1606 Award” only be the debt created by the Stop action just completed.

(b) If the claimant is beyond his 30-day due process period, include the total debt amount under “Previous Ch 1606 Award”. This action will cause the Chapter 1607 award to recoup the whole debt.

***Note: If benefits under Chapters 30, 31, 32, or 35 have been paid for Chapter 1607 eligibility periods, do not adjust the awards for these benefit types. Do not authorize Chapter 1607 for these periods.** Once the Chapter 1607 BDN system is installed, VCEs may adjust these benefit records and make retroactive awards in the Chapter 1607 BDN system. It is anticipated that the vast majority of the previous awards will be under Chapter 1606 as opposed to one of the other benefits. VCEs should set aside cases requiring termination of benefits other than Chapter 1606. Identify them in TIMS by entering “1607 OTH" in the facility code field.*

**d.** **Payments.** *Payment* will be issued using fiscal commands FIST and FAUT in the Chapter 34 BDN system. A BDN master record is not required to make these one-time payments. Education Service recommends specializing Chapter 1607 interim processing, and it is essential that the VCEs assigned to these cases have authority under FIST and FAUT commands. It will be impractical for Finance to implement these procedures.

(1) If the case **DOES NOT** include a 1606 debt:

(i) Access the F15 screen in BDN. On the Ready Screen, provide the screen number (F15), file number, payee number, benefit (CH34) and stub name. Do not indicate an end product.

(ii) On the F15 screen, place an X after 06A-ONE-TIME.

(iii) Enter the “Net Award Due” amount of the award (from the spreadsheet) in PYMT AMT. This amount must be entered as XXXX.XX.

(iv) Enter **56** as the COST CODE

(v) Enter the payee’s address information, using all capital letters. Use the second line to indicate “REAP mmddyy mmddyy” (beginning & ending dates of period being paid). This will aid in future audits of this veteran’s record.

(vi) Upon ALT/ENT, BDN generates a message that the processing is complete.

(vii) The PCGL letter AWD 23 should be prepared and captured into TIMS.

(viii) The payment is now ready to be authorized and released. Upon authorization the PCGL letter AWD 23 is released to the claimant.          

(ix) The Senior VCE’s next step is to retrieve the claimant’s spreadsheet (or spreadsheets) still saved on the shared drive, enter the award date in “Ch 1607 06A Date” field and his or her name in the “Approved By” field near the top of the spreadsheet. ***It is imperative that the date in the “CH 1607 06A” field be the date of the FAUT in BDN***. The final spreadsheet(s) is then captured into the claimant’s TIMS file and the case is finished. If multiple spreadsheets were used, each one must be annotated and captured individually; the total net awards are added together manually and paid using one 06A transaction.

**Example:** A student is enrolled in two different types of training during the retroactive award periods being paid. Two different spreadsheets will be completed for the information on the corresponding Recording Sheet to be correct; however, the total of the two will be paid using only one 06A one-time payment.

(x) The next step for the Senior VCE is to copy the information from each Recording Sheet prepared for each claimant and transfer the data to the “1607 Payment and Cost Code Report” master spreadsheet; if multiple spreadsheets were completed for one claimant, each Recording Sheet must be transferred to the Cost Code Report individually. Instructions for copying and pasting this information are found in [Appendix A](#A). When saving the spreadsheet please use this naming convention (using Buffalo as an example):

**"1607 Payment and Cost Code Report 307 Dec 05 A "**

If the RPO has more than one Senior VCE authorizing 1607 claims, each will maintain their own spreadsheet and the RPO will submit them to VACO individually. Distinguish the two (or more) Cost Code Report spreadsheets from an RPO using the suffix "A" for the first Senior (...Dec 05 A), "B" for the second (...Dec 05 B) and so on. The Buffalo Out of System team should submit their 1607 Payment and Cost Code Report as "1607 Payment and Cost Code Report 331 Dec 05 OOS".

(xi)  When the case is finally completed, the FC box should be changed to REAP if there are no subsequent terms beyond 2005 to be paid.  If there are subsequent terms that are not being paid in the interim period, indicate this by changing the FC box to REAP with a modifier of REAP + or REAP Y.

(xii) If the case **DOES** include a Chapter 1606 overpayment, at the same time as processing the 06A transaction in the Chapter 34 system, the VCE will also, under the FIST command, process a separate 08E in the Chapter 1606 system to recoup the Chapter 1606 debt created by the STOP command:

(A) To access the F25 screen in BDN, on the Ready Screen, provide the file number, payee number, benefit (1606) and stub name. Do not indicate an end product. BDN will default to the F25 screen automatically when there is no screen number requested.

(B) If there is a debt in the BDN system all the information will be displayed at the bottom of the screen under “M/R DATA”: the amount of the debt (“BALANCE”), the code to be used for the debt (“CODE/CLASS”) and the date of the debt (“DISC DATE”). This information will be used to populate the necessary fields on the F25 screen.

(C)  First, place an “X” after “08E-DECREASE A/R”, next input the “CODE/CLASS”,  then the amount of the debt under “TRANS AMT” and finally the date the debt was created (“DATE”). Upon ALT/ENT the same message should be displayed indicating the process was completed.     

(D) The PCGL letter AWD 23 should be prepared and captured into TIMS.         

(E) The payment (06A) and debt recoupment (08E) are both now ready to be authorized by the Senior VCE under the FAUT command as described in (i) above. If both an 06A and 08E are being authorized, upon capturing each after the FAUT command, please specify in TIMS that one F95 is for the 08E and the other F95 is for the 06A.

(F) Upon authorization the PCGL letter AWD 23 is released to the claimant.

(G) The Senior VCE’s next step is to retrieve the claimant’s spreadsheet (or spreadsheets) still saved on the shared drive, enter the award date in “Ch 1607 08E Date” field and his or her name in the “Approved By” field near the top of the spreadsheet. ***It is imperative that the date in the “CH 1607 06A” field be the date of the FAUT in BDN***. The final spreadsheet(s) is then captured into the claimant’s TIMS file and the case is finished.

(H) Next the Senior VCE is to copy the information from each Recording Sheet prepared for each claimant and transfer the data to the “1607 Payment and Cost Code Report” master spreadsheet; if multiple spreadsheets were completed for one claimant, each Recording Sheet must be transferred to the Cost Code Report individually. Instructions for copying and pasting this information are found in [Appendix A](#A). When saving the spreadsheet please use this naming convention (using Buffalo as an example):

**"1607 Payment and Cost Code Report 307 Dec 05 A "**

If the RPO has more than one Senior VCE authorizing 1607 claims, each will maintain their own spreadsheet and the RPO will submit them to VACO individually. Distinguish the two (or more) Cost Code Report spreadsheets from an RPO using the suffix "A" for the first Senior (...Dec 05 A), "B" for the second (...Dec 05 B) and so on. The Buffalo Out of System team should submit their 1607 Payment and Cost Code Report as "1607 Payment and Cost Code Report 331 Dec 05 OOS".

***Note:** If the debt was created in Buffalo instructions will follow.* 

(xiii)  When the case is finally completed, the FC box should be changed to REAP if there are no subsequent terms beyond 2005 to be paid.  If there are subsequent terms that are not being paid in the interim period, indicate this by changing the FC box to REAP with a modifier of REAP  + or REAP Y.

**e. Award letters**. VCEs will issue the PCGL AWD 23 letter; this letter will have a special attachment which outlines the unusual features of the Interim payment system such as: the one-time payment into the future; a lack of monthly certifications for payment; no processing of reductions in training; and no direct deposit.

**f. Report to Education Service**. Each RPO will forward the 1607 Payment and Cost Code Report spreadsheet to Education Service at the end of each month, forwarding it to [VAVBAWAS/CO/225B](mailto:VAVBAWAS/CO/225B?subject=Out-of-System%20Award). Education Service will aggregate the spreadsheets and report the amount paid to DoD/DHS.

**g. Check Tracers and Returned Checks.**

        (1) Check Tracers

Checks issued out of Chapter 34 are traced with a RUPD transaction as with other BDN checks.  Use the following codes:

> Check Date:        MMDDYY (Actual date of check)  
> Type Pay:        **4**  
> Claim Code:      
>         **C** (entitled)  
>         **E** (deceased)  
>         **F** (not entitled)  or  
>         **K** (photocopy only)  
>  D.O. Symbol:   **K**

       (2) Returned Checks

If a Chapter 1607 interim check issued out of Chapter 34 returns, there will be no master record to accept the proceeds of that check, so the funds will return to the education appropriation, 36X0137, and Hines should forward a VA Form 20-8271 advising that funds returned on an account with no master record to the RPO that issued the check. 

The returned check will show up on the TINQ screen only (similar to the way returned checks work for Chapter 35 terminated records).  If the funds from the check are still due to the veteran, another 06A will need to be processed, out of the Chapter 34 system. The replacement check should not be entered on the spreadsheet.

**h.  Accrued Benefits.** Follow the procedure in part IV, paragraph 11.27.

**i. Work-study.** For Chapter 1607 work-study payments, use the Chapter 34 system but with an 06L (work-study) transaction.

[!Go to Top](##Top)

**SUBCHAPTER II. Out-of-System Awards**

******9.03 Award Processing for Apprenticeship/OJT, Correspondence, and Flight Awards******

---

See RPO letter 22-07-24.  

**a. Overview**. RPOs will process these cases in a similar manner to the way Chapter 1606 awards for these benefits are currently processed. All RPOs will prepare the necessary VA Form 22-1992 and 22-1997(s). The Buffalo RPO will handle payments, letters, certifications, etc as Buffalo currently does for Chapter 1606. These types of training will not be restricted to a single one-time payment. Buffalo will issue monthly (or quarterly for correspondence) payments for these benefits.

**b. Adjusting Chapter 1606 Out-of-System Awards (Other Than Coast Guard IHL/NCD).** If a claimant was previously paid Chapter 1606 benefits based on correspondence, On-the-Job-Training/apprenticeship or flight training, and wishes to be paid for the same training under Chapter 1607, a termination to the claimant's Chapter 1606 out of system award is required.

(1) To prevent the possibility of creating debts in error, the VCE should review the REAP Eligibility website or any other evidence available indicating that the member is entitled to Chapter 1607 benefits.

(2) The VCE in the RPO must complete the VA Form 22-8046 template in TIMS and send the case to the Buffalo Hard Copy queue. The VCE will provide the reason code ("30") and effective date of the termination under Chapter 1606 on "Transaction Code" line A. Complete all other applicable blocks as well. An email should be sent to the Buffalo out-of-system team at VAVBASTL/RO/REAP, providing the file number and claimant's name. In the subject line of the email, please indicate "1606 Hard Copy" adjustment. Buffalo will terminate the Chapter 1606 award and will process the Chapter 1607 award.

(3)  Buffalo Out-of-System team determines the amount of the overpayment and reports the updated 1606 entitlement back to the RPO in response to the RPO VCE's email.

(4)  At this point, the VCE requests Upstream to CEST an EP 360 and then establishes a Chapter 1607 BDN record using the 310 screen, in the same manner as done for Chapters 30 and Chapter 1606 Hard Copy awards.  Upon the Seniors authorization the VCE completes the VA Form 22-1992 and 22-1997 template in TIMs and routes the claim to the Buffalo Hard Copy queue.

(5) The Buffalo out-of-system team Hard Copy team will annotate the 1607 payment card showing the 1606 debt amount. Buffalo will work the case from that step forward.

**c. Awards.** The VCE will use the templates in TIMS for VA Forms 22-1992 and 22-1997, just as is done currently for Chapter 1606 Hard Copy cases, sent to Buffalo for processing. The VCE provides all the necessary award information. For apprenticeship/OJT, the VCEs should enter the correct rates and effective dates on the award form. For correspondence and flight training, the VCE should enter in Remarks the appropriate percentage to pay and the effective date. After authorization, route these awards to the Buffalo Hard Copy queue in TIMS for payment, indicating REAP in the facility code. Even though this case may not have been paid yet, for the RPO of jurisdiction this case is completed.

**Example** (Correspondence): For correspondence training at the 40% rate, indicate in Remarks: Pay 22% effective 10/1/04. (See rate tables in chapter 1 for the appropriate percentages.) If the individual becomes eligible for a higher percentage, indicate that in Remarks also. For example, an individual was called up on 7/1/03 and was released on 8/1/04. He is eligible for the 40% rate (for correspondence, it's 22%) from 9/28/03. This person is eligible for the 60% rate (for correspondence, it's 33%) from 7/1/04. The Remarks should indicate: 22% Eff. 9/28/03; 33% Eff. 7/1/04.

**Example** (Flight): Same facts as above except the individual is in flight training. For example, an individual was called up on 7/1/03 and was released on 8/1/04. He is eligible for the 40% rate (flight, it's 24%) from 9/28/03. This person is eligible for the 60% rate (for flight, it's 36%) from 7/1/04. The remarks should indicate: 24% Eff. 9/28/03; 36% Eff. 7/1/04.

***NOTE:** If a claimant is due an increase in percentage during an award period, it may be necessary to determine the date(s) the student was in flight training or that the student completed a lesson.  Buffalo Hard Copy team will FLASH the claimant's paper record to keep up with the dates of increases due to continued active duty service under REAP.*

**d.  Award Letter.** The Buffalo RPO will send claimants the appropriate PCGL award letter as follows for these types of training: Correspondence (PCGL AWD-4), Flight (PCGL AWD-10), and OJT/Apprenticeship (PCGL AWD-9).

**e.  Issuance of Certifications of Attendance.**

(1) Apprenticeship/OJT. Buffalo will issue VAF 22-6553d-1, Monthly Certification of On-the-Job and Apprenticeship Training, by the 25th of each month for each case with a running award. These forms will have to be manually prepared unless the RPO can automate this process.

(2) Correspondence Training. Buffalo will issue VAF 22-6553b-1, Certification of Lessons Completed, by the 25th of each quarter for each case. Quarters end in Sept, Dec, Mar and June. These forms will have to be manually prepared unless the RPO can automate this process.

(3) Flight Training. Buffalo will not issue flight certification forms. As with the other benefits, flight schools will stock flight certification forms, VA Form 22-6553c, Monthly Certification of Flight Training, and send them to Buffalo as flight training is completed.

**f. Calculating Payments**.  Manual calculations are always necessary.  For apprenticeship/OJT,         

(1) Determine the amount to be paid for each calendar month based on the certification of hours received for that month.

(2) If the number of hours worked for a month is 120 or more, the amount due for that month is the monthly rate authorized on the award document.

**Example 1**: The veteran is to be paid at the 40% level for October 2006. His monthly rate for that month is $351.56 (see ch. 1 table) and the number of hours worked is 120. Pay $351.56.

(3) If the number of hours worked for a month is less than 120, round the number of hours worked to the nearest multiple of 8 and make additional calculations to be provided.

**Example 2:** To be added.

(4) Add up the amounts due for each month being paid. 

For flight certifications, calculate the allowable charges in the usual manner. Then multiply these charges by the percentage indicated in Remarks of the award document.

**Example 3:** The monthly certification for flight training is for $2,000. The percentage indicated in Remarks is 36%. Multiply $2,000 by 36% (this person is at the 60% level) to obtain $720. Pay $720.  
  
For correspondence certifications, calculate the charges on the quarterly certification in the usual manner. Then multiply these charges by the rate level indicated in Remarks of the VA From 22-1997.  
  
**Example 4:** Allowable correspondence charges are $100. The percentage indicated in Remarks is 22% (this person is at the 40% level). Multiply $100 by 22% to give $22. Pay $22.

**g**. **Entitlement Calculations.** Divide each payment by the individual's Chapter 1607 full-time institutional rate (including any Chapter 1606 kicker) in effect for the period in which the training occurred. This will result in a decimal which should be recorded to five places. Keep a history of entitlement charges for all payments made for these types of training. Don't let someone exceed their original entitlement. When a Chapter 1607 BDN system is implemented, the RPOs will add up the individual entitlement charges, multiply by 30 days, and enter the resulting months and days in the CUM REDUCED field.  
  
**Example:** We paying $351.56 as in example 1 above. This is a payment for training in fiscal year 2006. Divide $351.56 by the applicable 1607 full-time rate ($413.60= .85008). Keep the entitlement charge figure.

**h**. **Making Payments**. St. Louis will use the 06A transaction in the Chapter 1607 system to make these payments. During the Interim Processing period before Chapter 1607 was installed, St. Louis used the 06A transaction in the Chapter 34 system to make these payments. Here was the Interim procedure: For each payment, St. Louis must manually update all entries on the Chapter 1607 Payment and Cost Code Report. The RPO must manually enter the appropriate cost code for this report from the Chapter 1607 Cost Code table. Cost codes are broken down by component, service, type of training, and whether is with or without kicker. If a Chapter 1606 overpayment exists, be sure to record this data on the Chapter 1607 Payment and Cost Code Report.

**Example:** A person in the Army Reserve and is entitled to the Chapter 1607 basic benefit and is receiving benefits for on On-the Job-Training. Using the Cost Code table, the cost code to be entered on the Payment and Cost Code Report is 37 24.12. The “Kicker Cost Code” column would be left blank. If the claimant were entitled to a Chapter 1606 kicker the resulting Cost Code entry under “Kicker Cost Code” would be 37 24.13. Both would be entered on the Report.

**i.** **Notice to DoD Services.** As noted in [subchapter I,](#SI) each RPO will forward their Chapter 1607 Payment and Cost Code Report to the Education Service at the end of the month. Education Service will aggregate the spreadsheets and report the amount paid to DoD.

**j.** **Inquiries**. The 06A payments will not be recorded in any BDN master record. Therefore, the MINQ command cannot be used to review payment history. However, RPOs can use the TINQ command to review payment history in BDN. Each TIMS record will contain a payment history including the captured spreadsheet(s), F15 and F95 screens.

**k.** **Check Return Processing.** See paragraph [9.02g](#902g) above.  
 

[!Go to Top](##Top)

**9.04  Adjusting Chapter 1606 Coast Guard IHL/NCD Awards** (See Policy Advisory dated 6/9/06)

---

If  a Chapter 1607 claimant previously received Chapter 1606 benefits for IHL/NCD training as a Coast Guard service member, special procedures are required as given below.  These cases were paid Chapter 1606 benefits out-of-system by the St. Louis RPO.  Do not follow the usual Chapter 1607 procedures given in M22-4, draft part XI, subparagraphs 2.03c(2) through (4).

(a) The VCE must complete the VA Form 22-8046 template, capture it in TIMS, and route the case to the Coast Guard queue. The VCE  should use reason code "30,"  and the effective date will be the termination date  under Chapter 1606. In addition, the VCE should send an email to the Buffalo Support Service team at [atfindneal@vba.va.gov](mailto:atfindneal@vba.va.gov?subject=Out-of-System%20Awards) and a copy to Sean Burns in St. Louis at [vscsburn@vba.va.gov](mailto:vscsburn@vba.va.gov?subject=Out-of-System%20Awards). In the subject field of the email, enter "1607 Coast Guard IHL/NCD termination ."  The Buffalo Support Service will review cases in the Coast Guard queues twice a week.

(b) For these IHL/NCD cases,  the Buffalo Support Service will calculate the 1606 debt and establish a Chapter 1607 D-type master record with an offset for the Chapter 1606 debt.   The Support Service in Buffalo will  tell the VCE via email that the case is ready to work under Chapter 1607 and will provide the remaining Chapter 1606 entitlement.  Support Services will also send an e-mail to the Support Service contact  at the RPO of jurisdiction to alert him or her to follow special procedures for clearing the Chapter 1606 debt.  The VCE can now process the case as any other Chapter 1607 IHL/NCD case with a Chapter 1606 debt.  See  draft part XI, subparagraphs 2.03c(5) and (6).  
  
*Note:  The date of claim in BDN for these cases should be no earlier than the date the RPOs were advised of the special procedure in this paragraph.*

(c) For these IHL/NCD cases, Buffalo Support Service will calculate the 1606 debt and establish it in FMS and establish a 63C debt in Ch 1607 (which will also create a D-type master record). Support Service in Buffalo will respond via reply email that the case is ready to work under 1607, provide the remaining entitlement and will send an e-mail to the RPO of jurisdiction's Support Service contact, telling them to send the 63C funds to Buffalo to apply to the Coast Guard debt. The case can now be processed in the RPO of jurisdiction just as any 1607 IHL/NCD award.

(d) When requesting the 360 EP to formally establish eligibility for the Chapter 1607 master record, the date of claim for the backlogged Hard Copy cases should be no earlier than the date the RPOs were told they could work these cases. Once the EP 360 is established, the VCE can process the Coast Guard IHL/NCD case, inputting the 1607 enrollment periods into the D type master record, created by Support Service. When the enrollments are added to the 1607 award, and payment authorized through the CERT command, the debt should dissolve and the balance due the claimant will be forwarded upon the Senior VCE's review and authorization.

*Note: The Coast Guard IHL/NCD cases should always be worked as the next case, to prevent any further delay. The Buffalo Support Service's response email will be the VCE's notification that the case is ready; the VCE should capture the response from Buffalo Support Service into the file.*

[!Go to Top](##Top)

**Appendix A**

**Interim Chapter 1607 Rate and Entitlement Calculation Spreadsheet**   (HISTORICAL)

        The Chapter 1607 Rate and Entitlement Calculation Spreadsheet was developed to help the VCEs calculate the award amount a claimant is due. It also generates the percentage a claimant is entitled to as well as the effective dates of any increases based on length of active duty service. Additionally, it computes the amount of entitlement charged and the amount the claimant has remaining after award calculations are complete. A detailed review of all fields is below in [Table 1.](#t1)

The calculation sheet is only that, a tool to calculate rates and entitlement. There are no edits. This means, for example, enrollment periods can be input on the award period section of the spreadsheet out of sequence.  Care must be taken not to enter an award period more than once.

**Navigation Tips:**

"Caps Lock" should be on when using the spreadsheet.

Enter dates as (for example) "6-1-04"; the spreadsheet will format the dates as 06/01/04.

Using the "Tab" key will take you to the next enterable field. Using the "enter" key will take you to the next line below in the column you're in. Be careful, though, doing this will not take you to the next enterable field in that column, simply to the next field (whether or not it is an enterable field).

***Procedures***

> a) First the VCE enters his or her name in the “**Entered By**” field; this field accommodates up to 30 characters (in most cases there shouldn't be a need to abbreviate first or last names). 
>
> b)  In the **Activation Period Worksheet** portion, the VCE provides the claimant’s dates of active duty service. This must be done using the format MM/DD/YY; dashes or slashes between the month, days and year **must** be included as well. Also required is whether or not each period is valid for 1607 awards, as provided by DoD. The valid period field uses a drop down menu from which to choose "yes" or "no", which must be used; manual input is prohibited.
>
> c)  The VCE then inputs the claimant’s **basic info**: file number (hyphens in the social security number are optional), stub name, component, and service (the latter two items have drop down menus). Next, the “**Facility Code**” field is to identify the school by facility code (first two digits are chosen from a drop down menu, but the VCE can input the facility code manually as well).
>
> d)  The **Award Period Worksheet** portion requires the VCE to input the Chapter 30 full-time rate for the corresponding award period (a drop down menu provides Chapter 30 rates from 2001 through FY 2006, but the rate can be manually input), any 1606 kicker due (also a drop down menu - $100.00, $200.00 and $350.00), and the percentage the claimant is due (40%, 60%, 80%, already an output generated on the Activation Period Worksheet). 
>
> e)  Next the award period information is input by the VCE: enrollment Begin and End dates (provided in the format YYYY, MM, and DD), type training and training time. There is a separate section for calculating amounts due someone entitled to only to tuition and fees (active duty member or someone training at less than half-time). [See T&F instructions.](#TF)
>
> f) In the “**Entitlement**” block, it’s important that the amount entered is that which is remaining after any adjustments have been made to the claimant’s 1606 record.
>
> g)  If a Chapter 1606 debt exists, the dollar amount is provided by the VCE in the “**Previous Ch 1606 Award**” block at the end of the worksheet (directly below  “Total Award”).
>
> h) **It is imperative** that the VCE does NOT populate the “Award Date” field for either the 1607 06A or the 1606 Debt 06A (if needed). The date(s)will be added by the Senior VCE upon authorization of the fiscal transaction.
>
> i) The “**Delete**” field on the spreadsheet will delete everything that is on the spreadsheet. Any changes needed in any individual block is done by placing the cursor in the block to be erased, using the “delete” key on the VCE’s keyboard.

The **outputs** generated by the spreadsheet, determined by what the VCE enters are: 

The **Activation Period** portion of the spreadsheet generates the duration of the active duty service (in days), the percentage due the claimant with the effective date, and the dates on which the claimant passes “milestones” (is due a higher percentage).

**CAUTION:** The spreadsheet calculates the percentages due for each service period separately. Use caution with these calculations if there are multiple periods of activation. If a claimant qualifies for a 60% rate based on the first activation and a 40% rate based on a second activation, the claimant is entitled to the 60% rate from the date he first qualifies for that rate. VCEs must ignore the calculation of the 40% for the subsequent activation period.

The **Award Period** Worksheet portion of the spreadsheet generates the Chapter 1607 full time monthly rate (based on the percentage due that claimant for that enrollment period), the monthly rate actually due the claimant (based on training time), and the award amount (determined by the term dates provided on each line on the worksheet). Also generated by the worksheet are the length of the term (in days) and entitlement used and remaining. Finally, the “Total Award” amount is displayed. If a Chapter 1606 debt (entered by the VCE) is being subtracted from this total amount, the amount due the claimant is generated in the “Net Award Due” block. This is the payment amount input by the VCE on the F15 screen in BDN to generate payment. If there isn’t an A/R to be deducted, this field is left blank, and the “Net Award Due” generated on the spreadsheet will be the same amount as the “Total Award”. If more than one spreadsheet is used for any claimant, all net amounts are added together and the sum total is entered on the F15 screen.

**Recording Sheet**

The spreadsheet also generates a Recording Sheet which captures the following information associated with any given payment: basic cost code, Chapter 1607 basic amount paid (amount paid less any kicker to which the claimant is entitled), kicker cost code and kicker amount paid (if any), file number, stub name, the service and component the member is serving in, entitlement used, the net Chapter 1607 award amount and date of the award(s). Also recorded are the date of the 1606 08E transaction (if any) and amount of the 1606 A/R, the 1607 basic award amount, 1606 kicker amount (if applicable), the total award paid and the total 1606 kicker paid under Chapter 1607. The information from each Recording Sheet must be copied and pasted onto the 1607 Payment and Cost Code Report spreadsheet by the Senior VCE which will be maintained within each RPO and sent to VACO on a monthly basis. This information is critical for reporting purposes (primarily to DoD).   
  
The information is copied and pasted as follows:

> a)     Highlight the line on the Recording Sheet to be copied to the 1607 Payment and Cost Code Report. This can be done simply by highlighting the number of the line to the far left, which will highlight the entire line.
>
> b)     Either right click the mouse or, under the Edit drop down menu, choose “Copy”.
>
> c)     Bring up the Cost Code Report, place the cursor on the next available line; by right clicking the mouse (or using the Edit drop down menu) select “paste special” and “values” and finally, “ok”. This will transfer all data intact.

As noted in paragraph [9.02,](#902) at the end of each month this spreadsheet must be forwarded to Strategy & Legislative Development Staff (225B) via [E-mail](mailto:VAVBAWAS/CO/225B?subject=Out-of-System%20Awards) to "VAVBAWAS/CO/225B".  
  
After the VCE has completed the spreadsheet, and on the F15 screen has entered the amount to be issued to the claimant, the spreadsheet must be saved for review by the Senior VCE when authorizing the 06A transaction.  Saving the completed spreadsheet is done by selecting File, then Save As and then renaming the spreadsheet using the claimant's stub-name and the last four digits of the claimant’s social security number.  If separate spreadsheets have been worked (and saved individually) the VCE should save them as “stub name 1234 1of 3” (for example  GDEARR 1234 1of 3). 

The following table provides a description of all fields on the spreadsheet.  Fields that are populated by the VCE (or Senior VCE) are in **bold** print.

 

 

 

| **Field Name** | | **Description** | | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | |  | | | |
| Entered by | | The name of the VCE who completed the spreadsheet. This field accommodates up to 30 characters. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| Approved by | | The name of the Senior VCE who authorized the resulting 06A transaction(s). Also accommodates up to 30 characters. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| **Activated Periods:**  **Start** | | The date the claimant was activated. The dates must be input as MM/DD/YY, including slashes. Up to 10 different activation periods may be entered. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| **Activated Periods:**           **End** | | The date the claimant was released from active duty. The dates must be entered as MM/DD/YY, including slashes. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| Duration | | An output that provides the number of days that comprise the given period of activation. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| % | | The percentage of the MGIB Category 1B rate to which the claimant is entitled (based on the claimant’s length of active duty provided by the VCE on that line). | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| **Valid Period** | | This field has a drop down menu for the choice of “yes” (a valid period) or “no” (not valid). | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| Date 40% | | The date a claimant is entitled to 40% of the MGIB Category 1B rate. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| Date 60% | | The date a claimant is entitled to 60% of the MGIB Category 1B rate. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| Date 80% | | The date a claimant is entitled to 80% of the MGIB Category 1B rate. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| **File Number** | | The claimant’s 9-digit social security number. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| Stub Name | | The claimant’s first and middle initials and the first 5 letters in the last name. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| Component | | A drop down menu from which the VCE selects “Reserve”, “National Guard” or “IRR” by clicking on the applicable component. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| Service | | A drop down menu from which the VCE selects the claimant’s branch of service (Army, Air Force, Navy, Marine Corps or Coast Guard) by clicking on the claimant’s service department. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| **Delete** | | By clicking this cell all data entered on the spreadsheet will be erased. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| Facility Code | | The training establishment’s 8-digit facility code. The first two digits are drop down menus (profit status and facility type), the remaining 6 numbers are entered manually. If the award being entered is retroactive and reflects more than one facility code or type of training, separate spreadsheets must be used for each facility code.If the claimant is attending (or has attended) different schools based on a parent/supplemental school enrollment, just use the parent school’s facility code, even if the student is attending only the supplemental school. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| **Ch 30 Basic Full-time Rate** | | A drop down menu provides the MGIB Category 1B rates for any given fiscal year from 2001 to 2006.  Field is also manually enterable. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| **CH 1606 Kicke**r | | A drop down menu provides the three kicker amounts authorized under Chapter 1606. If the claimant is not entitled to a 1606 kicker, this field can either be left blank or “0” can be selected from the menu. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| CH 1607 Percentage | | The percentage a claimant is due for any given period. These percentages are calculated in the Activation Period Worksheet section, but see the Caution above regarding acceptance of these calculations.   Note that the VCE must enter a separate award line anytime the claimant's percentage increases; the spreadsheet itself will not increase the rates automatically. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| Ch 1607 Full-time Monthly Rate | | The full-time rate a claimant is due under Chapter 1607 based on a combination of the percentage the claimant is due, any kicker, and the given year of the award period being entered. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| Begin Date | | The first date of an award line or the effective date of an award change, in YYYY-MM-DD format. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| No Pay Date | | The day following the last day of an award period or the date of termination.  Literally, this is the first date of “no payment”.  It is displayed in YYYY-MM-DD format. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| Type Trng | | Displays the code for the type of training. A drop down menu provides the options of “A” (Graduate training), “B” (Undergraduate training), “C” (Non-degree IHL) or “P” (Vocational/Technical training). If type of training changes, separate spreadsheets must be used for this as well, even if the school remains the same. For example, a claimant is an undergrad at X school and graduates and enters a G. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| Trng Time | | A drop down menu from which the training time code is selected. Choices are training time 0 – 4. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| Monthly Rate | | The monthly rate (including kicker, if any) the claimant is due for the corresponding award line. In 9999.99 format. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| Award | | The total amount the claimant is due, based on the length of the training period, monthly rate due and training time for the corresponding award line. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| Term (days) | | The length of the award period on the corresponding award line. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| **Entitlement** ORIG MONTHS | | The number of months a claimant is entitled to benefits. The number input must be after any adjustments to a 1606 record is completed. Should not exceed 36 months. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| **Entitlement**  **ORIG  DAYS** | | The number of days a claimant is entitled to benefits. The number input must be after any adjustments to a 1606 record is completed. Days should not exceed 29. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| CH 1607 06A DATE | | This is the date the claimant’s Chapter 1607 06A transaction, issuing the one-time payment, was authorized by the Senior VCE. This date is entered by the Senior VCE (not the VCE) after authorization using the FAUT command. This date must be in the MM/DD/YY format, including all slashes. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| CH 1606 DEBT 08E DATE | | This is the date the claimant’s Chapter 1606 06A transaction, if necessary to recoup a Chapter 1606 debt, was authorized by the Senior VCE. This date is entered by the Senior VCE (not the VCE) after authorization using the FAUT command. This date must be in the MM/DD/YY format, including all slashes. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| **PREVIOUS CH 1606 AWARD** | | The amount of the debt remaining in the claimant’s Chapter 1606 record if a debt was created (or was existing) when issuing payment under Chapter 1607 for enrollment period(s) previously paid under Chapter 1606. In the 9999.99 format. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| NET AWARD DUE | | The amount the claimant is awarded after subtracting any overpayments in the claimant’s Chapter 1606 record. If there was no Chapter 1606 debt to recoup, this amount will be the same as the Total Award. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| Total Ent Used       Months | | The months of entitlement charged to all enrollment periods entered in the Award Period Worksheet portion of the spreadsheet. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| Total Ent Used       Days | | The days of entitlement charged to all enrollment periods entered in the Award Period Worksheet portion of the spreadsheet. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| Remaining Ent      Months | | The months of entitlement remaining after all enrollment periods entered in the Award Period Worksheet portion of the spreadsheet are deducted from the original entitlement entered on the spreadsheet by the VCE. | | | |
|  | |  | | | |
| Remaining Ent      Days | | The days of entitlement remaining after all enrollment periods entered in the Award Period Worksheet portion of the spreadsheet are deducted from the original entitlement entered on the spreadsheet by the VCE. | | | |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |

 

**T&F (Tuition and Fee) Calculator Instructions:**

        The tuition and fee “calculator” portion of the spreadsheet is found on the bottom of the spreadsheet. There are three lines (rows 37, 38 and 39) that provide for calculating up to three terms. The steps to use the calculator and what to do with the resulting rates are:

First, enter the tuition and fees as provided by the Certifying Official at the training establishment in the space provided for T&F. There is no specific format to input the amount; dollar signs and decimal points are not necessary. If the tuition and fees are $500.00 simply inputting “500” will populate the field as $500.00.

Next, select the appropriate Ch 30 Basic Full-time Rate from the drop-down menu, based on the full-time rate for the fiscal year for the enrollment period being calculated.

Select the Chapter 1606 kicker ($100.00, $200.00 or $350.00) if the claimant is entitled to one from the drop down menu found in Ch 1606 Kicker.

Select the Chapter 1607 percentage already provided in the Activation Period portion of the worksheet in the block entitled CH 1607 Percentage. If calculating multiple T&F enrollments, be careful to select the percentage the claimant is entitled to for the enrollment period being calculated.

The calculator will now provide the Chapter 30 full-time monthly rate that would be payable if we were paying Chapter 30 in the T&F Monthly Rate block and the 1607 full-time rate in the CH 1607 Full-Time Monthly Rate block, based on the percentage the claimant is due as input by the VCE.

Continue on the same row and enter Begin Date, No Pay Date, Type Trng, and Trng Time. The Begin Date of the enrollment period being calculated is input as YYYY, MM, DD. The No Pay Date is also input as YYYY, MM, DD. The calculator will determine and display the Chapter 1607 monthly rate due the claimant based on training time, percentage due and the length of the term.

Now all information is available to input the enrollment periods calculated onto the Award Period Worksheet (rows 34 and 35). Input the term dates and other data just as for any enrollment period: Begin Date, No Pay Date, Type Training and Training Time. Also, enter the monthly rate in the Monthly Rate field. This is the rate generated under Monthly Rate in the T&F rows (37-39) as described in the preceding paragraph. The spreadsheet will generate the total amount due for the award line in the Award field and will also calculate the entitlement for that award line.

If a cost of living adjustment (COLA) is necessary during the award period being calculated, the procedure will vary slight from the steps above. (This procedure is not necessary if the claimant will be fully reimbursed for tuition and fees regardless what the MGIB full-time rate is.) Since the full-time MGIB monthly rate dictates the Chapter 1607 rate payable for any given period, it is important to include any increase in the MGIB rate in the calculations. The term in question is input in its entirety twice (enter the identical award data, including term dates, tuition and fees etc. twice): first with the pre-COLA MGIB full-time rate selected from the drop-down menu (Col E) and second with the new MGIB full-time rate. The spreadsheet will now generate Chapter 1607 monthly rates for each period in the Monthly Rate field. Now the VCE will enter actual award data on lines 34 and 35. On line 34, the term is input showing the correct Begin Date and 10/1 as the No Pay date. Use the monthly rate which was generated on line 37. On line 35, use 10/1 as the Begin Date and use the actual No Pay date based on the enrollment. Use the monthly rate which was generated on line 38. Here is an example of these calculations.

 

[!Go to Top](##Top)