# PART 01, GENERAL. CHAPTER 02, DEFINITIONS

**PART 01, GENERAL. CHAPTER 02, DEFINITIONS**  
Last Updated: November 4, 2020

The definitions given in this chapter are for terms commonly used in the administration of all education benefits covered under this manual. At times, it will be necessary to refer to title 38 or the CFR for the complete legal definition.

[B](#b)     [C](#c)     [D](#d)     [E](#e)     [F](#f)     [G](#g)     [H](#h)     [I](#i)     [J](#j)     [K](#k)     [L](#l)     [M](#m)     [N](#n)     [O](#o)     [P](#p)     [Q](#q)     [R](#r)     [S](#s)     [T](#t)     [U](#u)     [V](#v)     [W](#w)     [Y](#y)   [#](#num)

[Acronyms](#Acronyms)

**ACADEMIC YEAR** The period of time beginning August 1st of each calendar year and ending July 31st of the subsequent calendar year.

**ACCREDITING AGENCY** A nationally recognized agency or association which the Secretary of Education determines as a reliable authority on the quality of training offered by an educational institution. The Secretary publishes a list of these agencies and associations which [SAAs](#saa) (State Approving Agencies) use for establishing what courses may be approved under the provisions of [38 U.S.C. 3675](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:3675%20edition:prelim)).

**ACCRUED BENEFITS** Benefits payable to next of kin or other eligible beneficiaries of a deceased claimant; payments represent amounts due but unpaid at time of death.

**ACTIVE DUTY** Full-time duty in the Armed Forces of the United States or under a call or order to active duty under [10 U.S.C 688](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10%20section:688%20edition:prelim)), [12301(a)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10%20section:12301%20edition:prelim)), [12301(d)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10%20section:12301%20edition:prelim)), [12301(g)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10%20section:12301%20edition:prelim)), [12302](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10%20section:12302%20edition:prelim)), or [12304](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10%20section:12304%20edition:prelim)). Also included is Title 32 service for the purposes of organizing, administering, recruiting, instructing, or training in the National Guard; or under [section 502(f)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:32%20section:502%20edition:prelim)) for the purpose of responding to a national emergency. This also includes full-time duty performed by commissioned officers of the Public Health Service ([PHS](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000063717/PART%2001,%20GENERAL.%20CHAPTER%2002,%20DEFINITIONS#phs)) and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ([NOAA](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000063717/PART%2001,%20GENERAL.%20CHAPTER%2002,%20DEFINITIONS#noaa)). (See [38 U.S.C. 101(21)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:101%20edition:prelim)) for a full definition)

**ACDUTRA (ACTIVE DUTY FOR TRAINING)** ACDUTRA is Active duty for training in the Reserves or National Guard. This includes reservists on full-time duty for training purposes in the Armed Forces, or members of the National Guard or Air National Guard of any state, performing full-time training duty under [32 U.S.C. 316](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:32%20section:316%20edition:prelim)), [502](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:32%20section:502%20edition:prelim)), [503](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:32%20section:503%20edition:prelim)), [504](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:32%20section:504%20edition:prelim)), or [505](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:32%20section:505%20edition:prelim)). (See [38 U.S.C. 101(22)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:101%20edition:prelim)) for full definition)

**AGR (ACTIVE GUARD RESERVE)** A member of the Army Reserve, Air Force Reserve, Army National Guard or Air Force National Guard who is on active duty for purposes other than training. The Marine Corps Reserve equivalent is called FTS (Full-Time Service).

**ADVANCE PAYMENT** The monetary allowance which may be payable to a student for the first fractional (or full) month and the following full month of enrollment. These payments are issued to schools before the beginning of classes for release to students who have completed registration.

**AFFIRMATION OF ENROLLMENT** The document (VA Form 22-1999c) signed by the student affirming an enrollment contract for a correspondence course. The date of affirmation must be 10 days after the Veteran or eligible person has signed the enrollment contract. This is used only for those students pursuing Correspondence Courses.

**ALTERNATIVE TEACHER CERTIFICATION PROGRAM** A program leading to a teacher's certificate that allows individuals with a bachelor's degree or graduate degree to obtain teacher certification without enrolling in an institution of higher learning (See [38 CFR 21.7020(b)(43)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=039b17a5a870c118b26e0de82fab6c8e&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17020))

**APPRENTICESHIP TRAINING** On-the-job training which has been established as an apprentice course by a training establishment, including a course under the supervision of a college or university, any State department of education, State apprenticeship agency, State board of vocational education, joint apprenticeship committee, or the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training and which has been approved as an apprentice course by the SAA. Apprenticeship training differs from on-the-job training (OJT) in that it combines OJT with classroom instruction to prepare workers for a job. Often after completing an apprenticeship, the student receives a Certificate of Apprenticeship. Examples of apprenticeship training include machinist, land surveyor, or baker.

**A/R** This is the abbreviation for the financial term, accounts receivable.

**ARMED FORCES** The Armed Forces are the United States Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, and Coast Guard, including the reserve components thereof. (See [38 CFR 3.1](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=039b17a5a870c118b26e0de82fab6c8e&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&n=pt38.1.3&r=PART#se38.1.3_11) for full definition.)

**ASSIGNMENT OF BENEFITS** Any arrangement by a school which denies the student the opportunity to control the proceeds of a check. [Section 5301(a) of title 38, U.S. Code](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:5301%20edition:prelim)), provides that payments of benefits due under the laws administered by VA shall not be assigned except as specifically authorized by law. There are no laws that authorize assignment of VA educational checks or direct deposit/EFT (Electronic Fund Transfer).

**ATTENDANCE** The presence of a Veteran or eligible person in the class where the approved course is being taught at a training establishment; or any other place of instruction, training, or study designated by the educational institution or training establishment where the Veteran or eligible person is enrolled and is pursuing a program of education. (See [38 CFR 21.4200(q)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=039b17a5a870c118b26e0de82fab6c8e&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14200))

**AUDITED COURSE** Any credit course that a student attends as a listener only with a prior understanding between school officials and the student that such attendance will not result in credit being granted toward graduation.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**BAH** Basic Allowance for Housing (Used in Chapter 33 benefits).

**BASIC EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE** A monetary benefit payable to all individuals who meet the basic requirements of chapter 30, title 38, U.S. Code, for pursuit of a program of education. (See [38 CFR 21.7020(b)(4)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=039b17a5a870c118b26e0de82fab6c8e&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17020))

**BDN (BENEFITS DELIVERY NETWORK)** One of VBA’s main processing system for education awards and related actions. This system generates the payment information that is sent to the Treasury for producing the benefit checks. BDN also contains the master education record files for Veterans and other beneficiaries.

**BENEFICIARY** An individual who has filed a claim for educactional assistance from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

**BINQ (BIRLS INQUIRY)** A BDN command to access BIRLS (Beneficiary Identification and Records Locator Subsystem).

**BIRLS (BENEFICIARY IDENTIFICATION AND RECORDS LOCATOR SUBSYSTEM)** A computerized record system containing basic identifying information on a VA claimant including current location of the claimant's folder and service information.

**BVA (BOARD OF VETERANS APPEALS)** The VA organization that handles appeals of Veteran benefit decisions.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**CADD (CHANGE OF ADDRESS)** A BDN command used to change a claimant's address.

**CADJ (CLAIMS ADJUDICATION)** A BDN command used to process a claim.

**CAVC (THE COURT OF APPEALS FOR VETERANS CLAIMS)** The Federal Appellate Court having initial appellate authority over decisions made or affirmed by BVA.

**CDEV (CLAIMS DEVELOPMENT)** A BDN command usually used to send development letters.

**C/E (CERTIFICATE OF ELIGIBILITY)** Correspondence to an applicant showing approval to pursue a stated program of education at a particular institution, the remaining entitlement of the student, and the ending date of the student’s eligibility. This is also abbreviated as COE.

**CELO** Chief Education Liaison Officer, reports to Team Chief, Approval, Compliance & Liaison (AC&L).

**CERT (CERTIFICATION)** A BDN command used to verify school attendance.

**CERTIFICATION OF DELIVERY OF ADVANCE PAYMENT AND ENROLLMENT (COD)** VA Form 22-1999V containing preprinted information furnished to schools in a separate envelope when an advance payment check is issued for one of their students. This form must be completed by the certifying official and immediately returned to VA when the advance payment check is given to the student.

**CERTIFYING OFFICIAL** The person at an education institution whom VA has delegated the authority to sign enrollment certifications, other certification documents, and reports relating to VA benefits. This may also be abbreviated [SCO](#sco).

**CEST (CLAIMS ESTABLISHMENT)** A BDN command used to establish appropriate control for a claim.

**CHANGE OF PROGRAM** A change in the educational, professional, or vocational objective for which the claimant entered training. (See [38 CFR 21.4234(a)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=335bf8db54b2f49202163a7300240c3c&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14234)).

**CHARACTER OF DISCHARGE** A service department's characterization of a particular period of service. Examples include honorable, other than honorable, and dishonorable.

**CHAPTER 1607** This benefit refers to the Reserve Educational Assistance Program ([REAP](#reap)). REAP has a sunset date of November 25, 2015. No new applications may be received after that date.

**CHAPTER 1606** This benefit refers to the Montgomery GI Bill for Selected Reserve participants. This is also abbreviated [MGIB-SR](#sr).

**CHAPTER 30** This benefit refers to the Montgomery GI Bill for Active Duty. This is also abbreviated [MGIB](#mgib).

**CHAPTER 31** This benefit refers to the Veteran Readiness and Employment Service benefit for those with service-connected disabilities. Also known as VR&E benefits.

**CHAPTER 32** A contributory educational assistance program provided for Post-Vietnam Era Veterans under [Chapter 32 of title 38, U.S. Code](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title38/part3/chapter32&edition=prelim). This is also known as VEAP (Veterans Education Assistance Program).

**CHAPTER 33** This benefit is the [Post 9/11 GI Bill](#33).

**CHAPTER 35** This benefit is also known as the Survivors’ and Dependents’ Educational Assistance ([DEA](#35)). This benefit is payable to eligible dependents and survivors of Veterans under [Chapter 35 of title 38, U.S. Code](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title38/part3/chapter35&edition=prelim).

**CIWD (CONDITION INTERFERED WITH DUTY)** This is a separation reason designating a type of release from active duty.

**CLAIMANT** An individual who has filed a claim for VA benefits. This term is used at any stage in the process of resolving the claim. It includes persons who are potentially eligible for benefits, recipients of benefits, and those whose claims have been disallowed.

**CNAM (CHANGE NAME)** A BDN command used to change a claimant's name.

**COLLEGE FUND KICKER** An individual’s branch of service may offer the College Fund (also known as a “kicker”) as part of an enlistment or reenlistment contract, or for other reasons they determine. The College Fund is an additional amount of money that increases an individual’s basic monthly benefit and is included in his or her VA payment.

**COG (CONVENIENCE OF GOVERNMENT)** A separation reason from active duty which allows discharge before completion of the obligated period of service. COG is most often used in determining eligibility under Chapters 30 and 32.

**CONCURRENT ENROLLMENT** Enrollment at more than one school at the same time (the dates of course pursuit at each school may overlap). When a student cannot successfully schedule his or her complete program at one school, or cannot complete his or her program within the planned period to complete an objective, a student may pursue courses at a second institution. The primary institution certifies that supplemental school pursuit will be accepted at full credit toward the student's course objective.

**CONFIRMED ENROLLMENT** An enrollment certification which is dated and signed by the school's certifying official on or after the first day of a certified enrollment period.

**COOPERATIVE TRAINING** Training that allows an individual to attend school and gain work experience at the same time. Some schools partner with employers, allowing the individual to attend classes in his or her desired field.

**CORR (CORRECTION)** A BDN command used to change specific fields in BDN records.

**CORRESPONDENCE TRAINING** In correspondence training, students receive lessons in the mail or via e-mail. Students have a certain amount of time to complete and return the lessons for a grade. This is different from distance learning, which is completed on a strict schedule. Examples include training to become a photographer, locksmith, or gunsmith.

**COST OF COURSE** The total cost of tuition and fees for a course that an educational institution charges to everyone who attends their institution.

**COURSE** A unit of instruction required for an approved program of education that provides an individual with the knowledge and skills necessary to meet the requirements of the selected educational, professional, or vocational objective.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**DATE OF AFFIRMATION** The date, which is not less than 7 days after the date a student signs an enrollment agreement for a correspondence course on which the student signs and submits to VA a written agreement affirming the enrollment agreement.

**DD FORM 214** The Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty which is prepared at the time an individual completes a period of active duty in the Armed Forces. Former members of the Public Health Service and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration do not receive a DD Form 214. Veterans of these branches of service receive comparable documents which provide necessary information concerning their active duty service.

**DEA (DEPENDENTS' EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE) PROGRAM—CHAPTER 35 OF TITLE 38, U.S. CODE** The benefits payable to eligible dependents and survivors of Veterans under [Chapter 35 of title 38, U.S. Code](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title38/part3/chapter35&edition=prelim). See [Chapter 35](#c35).

**DEFECTIVE ENLISTMENT** An agreement for enlistment into military service which is voided for one of the following reasons: (1) the individual enlisted was a minor for purposes of service in the Armed Forces; (2) the enlistment or induction was erroneous; or (3) the enlistment agreement was defective. A defective enlistment is a factor in chapter 30 and chapter 33 determinations.

**DEFICIENCY COURSE** Any secondary level course or subject not previously completed satisfactorily but specifically required for pursuit of a post-secondary program of education. (See [38 CFR 21.4200(s)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4c73d4646f06dc4ddfb21ecc298465e9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14200)).

**DELIMITING DATE** The first day after a claimant's period of eligibility expires. Benefits are not payable on or after the delimiting date.

**DEP (DELAYED ENLISTMENT PROGRAM)** A form of delayed entry which allows individuals to contract to enter on active duty in the Armed Forces at a later date. The periods of time of the delayed entry onto active duty vary according to the specific program involved. For example, under DEP, the delayed entry onto active duty varies up to 270 days. In other programs, such as Reserve Officers' Training Corps (ROTC), the delay may be several years.

**DEPENDENT** A Veteran or Servicemember’s spouse, biological child, adopted child, or stepchild. In some instances (very rarely), a Veteran’s mother or father may also be considered a dependent if they are dependent upon the Veteran for financial support.

**DISABLING EFFECTS OF CHRONIC ALCOHOLISM** Alcohol-induced physical or mental disorders or both, such as habitual intoxication, withdrawal, delirium, amnesia, dementia, and other like manifestations of chronic alcoholism which have been medically diagnosed as manifestations of alcohol dependency or chronic alcohol abuse, and are determined to have prevented commencement or completion of the affected individual's chosen program of education. (See [38 CFR 21.7020(b)(38)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=039b17a5a870c118b26e0de82fab6c8e&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17020))

**DISCHARGE (OR RELEASE)** Dismissal or release from a period of service. (See [38 U.S.C.101(18)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:101 edition:prelim)) for special circumstances which may be considered a discharge)

**DISTANCE LEARNING** A formalized teaching system that consists of interaction between the student and the instructor (who is physically separated from the student) through the use of communications technology instead of regularly scheduled, conventional classroom or laboratory sessions. Communications technology includes mail, telephone, audio or videoconferencing, computer technology (online Internet courses or e-mail), or other electronic means such as one-way and two-way transmissions through open broadcast, closed circuit, cable, microwave, broadband lines, fiber optics, satellite, or wireless communications devices.

**DIVISIONS OF THE SCHOOL YEAR** An ordinary school year is generally a period of 2 semesters or 3 quarters which is not less than 30 or more than 39 weeks in total length. Other divisions of the school year are terms, quarters, semesters, summer terms, and summer sessions. (See [38 CFR 21.4200(b)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4c73d4646f06dc4ddfb21ecc298465e9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14200))

**DLC (DATE OF LAST CERTIFICATION)** The last date through which an eligible person's training has been verified. The DLC field on BDN shows the day following the actual date of last certification. For example, if the Veteran's training has been verified through June 30; DLC on BDN will show July 1.

**DLP (DATE OF LAST PAYMENT)** The last date through which payment has been issued based on a student's enrollment. The DLP field on BDN shows the day following the actual date of last payment. For example, if the Veteran has been paid through April 30, DLP on BDN will show May 1.

**DMC** This is the abbreviation of the Debt Management Center which is the VA facility which manages all debt collection for VA.

**DMDC (DEFENSE MANPOWER DATA CENTER) RECORD** The DMDC record contains information from the Serviceperson's military records. VA accesses the Department of Defense's (DOD's) manpower database through computer interface between DMDC in Monterey, CA, and the BDN system. This data is used primarily for chapters 30 and 1606.

**DOD** An abbreviation for the Department of Defense.

**DOOR** This is the abbreviation for Distribution of Operational Resources, a monthly report.

**DPRIS** Abbreviation for Defense Personnel Records Information Retrieval System. This is a web based system which allows the user to access to the Veteran’s official military personnel record.

**DROP PERIOD** The period defined by the school or institution in which there is no penalty to a student to reduce the number of credits they are pursuing during the same term. The period may vary based on institutions. For VA purposes however, the drop period can never be greater than 30 days from the first day of the term.

**DROPPED PRIORS** Award lines covering dates earlier than the current award period which have been dropped from the primary award screen due to lack of storage space.

**DUAL ENTITLEMENT** Eligibility to education benefits under two or more programs administered by VA. If an individual qualifies for educational assistance under two or more such programs, the total assistance available may not exceed an aggregate total of 48 months, or the equivalent in part-time benefits. A person having dual eligibility may not receive more than one benefit at a time. There are rare instances in which a dependent may be eligible to 81 months with dual entitlement.

**DUPC (DUPLICATE CLAIM)** A BDN command used to combine duplicate file numbers in BDN.

**DVA (DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS)** The executive department established by law to administer Veterans’ benefits (under title 38, U.S. Code).

**DUPLICATION OF BENEFITS** Concurrent payment of education benefits under more than one VA program and concurrent payment of VA education benefits and payment under certain other federal benefit programs.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**EARLY-OUT DISCHARGE** A discharge before the completion of the obligated period of service; may be a factor in eligibility for chapters 30 and 32.

**ECAP (ELECTRONIC CERTIFICATION AUTOMATED PROGRAM)** An automated program that processes enrollment certifications and changes in student status submitted from school certifying officials.

**ECSS (Education Compliance Survey Specialist)** An employee at a RPO responsible for conducting compliance surveys at training establishments and institutions.

**ECM (Education Case Manager)** An employee at the Education Call Center (ECC) responsible for providing assistance to claimants who call the toll free education benefit helpline.

**EDUCATION OFFICER (EO)** An individual at the RPO with management responsibility for education awards and other actions.

**EDUCATION SERVICES OFFICER (ESO)** An ESO is a person assigned the responsibility for advising service members of the educational opportunities available to active duty personnel. This includes civilian ESOs, military career counselors, and other employees of military education offices.

**EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE** The monetary benefits received by a Veteran or eligible person. This term is generally used interchangeably with the term "education benefits." However, under the Montgomery GI Bill—Active Duty, the term "educational assistance" means basic educational assistance, supplemental educational assistance, and all additional amounts payable, commonly called "kickers." (See [38 CFR 21.7020(b)(12)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=039b17a5a870c118b26e0de82fab6c8e&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17020))

**EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION** Any public or private elementary school, secondary school, vocational school, correspondence school, business school, junior college, teachers' college, college, normal school, professional school, university, or scientific or technical institution, or other institution furnishing education for adults. It also includes training establishments and organizations that offer licensing and certification tests. Another term used is Training Establishment. (See also [38 CFR 21.4200(a)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4c73d4646f06dc4ddfb21ecc298465e9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14200))

Chapter 35 has a similar definition except that education furnished must be at the secondary school level or above. The chapter 35 definition includes institutions which provide specialized vocational courses for the mentally or physically handicapped generally recognized as on the secondary school level or above. (See [38 CFR 21.3021(k)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=e3f75d924e9bdfe1ef388c597b7069d7&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_13021))

**EDUCATIONAL OBJECTIVE** An objective is one that leads to the awarding of a diploma, degree or certificate which reflects educational attainment.

**EFFECTIVE DATE** An effective date or “as of date” is the date upon which something (a rule, law, or other) is considered to take effect. This may be different from the date upon which the event actually occurs or is recorded.

**ELR (EDUCATION LIAISON REPRESENTATIVE)** An individual at a RPO responsible for the education liaison and program approval functions. The ELR is responsible for promptly informing SAAs, schools, and training establishments of changes in policies and procedures.

**ENROLLED** A student is registered at an institution and is therefore enrolled; however, he or she may not be attending courses or receiving VA Education benefits. For example, an individual applies to an institution and is accepted in November 2010, but his or her term does not begin until August 2011.

**ENROLLMENT** The state of being on the rolls or file of a school which contains the names of active students. (See [38 CFR 21.4200(n)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4c73d4646f06dc4ddfb21ecc298465e9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14200))

**ENROLLMENT MANAGER (EM)** A secure website that allows school certifying officials to submit enrollments, changes and monthly certifications to VA for efficient processing of education benefits. 

**ENROLLMENT PERIOD** A period of time during which a student is enrolled in an educational institution in pursuit of a program of education (i.e. term, quarter, or semester). (See [38 CFR 21.4200(p)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4c73d4646f06dc4ddfb21ecc298465e9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14200))

**ENTITLEMENT** The number of months the student is eligible for VA education benefits. This is usually expressed in the number of months and days the student will be eligible for full-time benefits, or the equivalent in part-time training, but also may be expressed in a dollar amount. Entitlement may vary depending on the education program the individual qualifies under. In most situations, entitlement will not exceed 48 months under any combination of laws. Exceptions may exist under Transfer of Entitlement for Dependents.

**EOD (ENTERED ON DUTY)** An abbreviation for the date that a Veteran or service member entered on active duty.

**EPC (END PRODUCT CODE)** A BDN code representing the work credit a RPO and/or employee receives for a particular type of claim.

**EPTS (EXISTED PRIOR TO SERVICE)** An abbreviation for a "qualifying disability" that a claimant is determined to have had before entry on active duty.

**EQUIVALENT CLOCK HOURS** Clock hours arrived at when a student takes any course creditable toward a standard college degree. VA will determine the equivalent clock hours if a semester or quarter-hour course overlaps with a primary course measured on a clock-hour basis. Using a formula, the credit hours are converted into equivalent clock hours. VA treats equivalent clock hours as clock hours for measurement purposes.

**EQUIVALENT CREDIT HOURS** Credit hours arrived at when a term is not a standard semester or quarter. VA will determine the equivalent for full-time undergraduate training. Using a formula, the result is called equivalent credit hours. VA treats equivalent credit hours as credit hours for measurement purposes.

**ESTABLISHED CHARGE** The actual charge for tuition and fees that similarly circumstanced nonveterans enrolled in the program of education are required to pay; OR, the lesser of the charge for a student’s correspondence course or courses determined on the basis of the lowest extended time payment plan offered by the educational institution and approved by the appropriate SAA, or the actual cost to the student. (See [38 CFR 21.3131](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=16ab6400db211fd78c5070281cd0bc48&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_13131), and [21.7520(b)(31)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=16ab6400db211fd78c5070281cd0bc48&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17520))

**ETS (EXPIRATION OF TERM OF SERVICE)** This is a separation reason shown on DD Form 214. Generally, ETS is considered to be a type of COG discharge.

**EXTERNAL DEGREE** A standard college degree given by an accredited college or university based on satisfactory completion of a prescribed program of independent study. The program may require occasional attendance for a workshop or seminar and may include some regular residence course work. (See [38 CFR 21.4200(d)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4c73d4646f06dc4ddfb21ecc298465e9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14200))

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**FAC CODE (FACILITY CODE)** The numeric code assigned by VA to an institution specifically identifying it or one of its subdivisions.

**FAUT (FISCAL AUTHORIZATION)** A BDN command to authorize/approve a FIST. A person other than the individual who processed the FIST command must process the FAUT command.

**FEES** Any mandatory charges (other than tuition, room, and board) that are applied by the institution of higher learning for pursuit of an approved program of education. Fees include, but are not limited to, health premiums, freshman fees, graduation fees, and lab fees.

**FFP (FULL FILE PASS)** A term used on monthly schedules of operation in BDN to indicate when certain processing occurs. FFP issues certification forms, processes delinquent certifications, generates collection letters and produces reports.

**FIST (FISCAL TRANSACTION)** A BDN command to adjust accounts payable and/or receivable.

**FLIGHT TRAINING** Training provided by an FAA (Federal Aviation Administration) approved school which leads to a vocational objective in the field of aviation or a standard college degree.

**FNOD (FIRST NOTICE OF DEATH)** An abbreviation for the first information showing that a claimant has died. This is also a BDN command to update the Master Records.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**GAD (GENERATE AND DISPLAY)** A command used to have BDN show the generated award information.

**GAP (GENERATE AND PRINT)** A command used to have BDN show appropriate award information and moves the award to the authorization phase of processing.

**GED (GENERAL EDUCATIONAL DEVELOPMENT) CERTIFICATE** A certificate issued by a State-level department of education which is acceptable as the equivalent of a high school diploma. In addition, a DOD certificate of GED equivalency is acceptable evidence of completion of high school educational requirements.

**GRADUATE RESIDENT TRAINING** Graduate resident training is a course which is offered through regularly scheduled, conventional classroom or laboratory sessions, or consists of research necessary for the preparation of the student's master's thesis, doctoral dissertation, or a similar treatise which is a prerequisite to the degree being pursued. (See [38 CFR 21.4273(a)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=e3f75d924e9bdfe1ef388c597b7069d7&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14273))

**GRANDFATHER RULES** Students who were attending a private college or university in certain states, and have been enrolled in the same program since January 4, 2011. These students will be reimbursed either the actual cost of the program or the maximum in-state tuition and fee reimbursement rate for the 2010-2011 school year, whichever is greater. These rules apply only to Chapter 33 students.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**HON (HONORABLE)** An abbreviation for a type of discharge from service.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**IADT (INITIAL ACTIVE DUTY FOR TRAINING)** A military term referring to the first period, generally 6 months in length, of active duty training; a factor for eligibility under chapter 1606. IADT is required for people entering Selected Reserve.

**IHL (INSTITUTION OF HIGHER LEARNING)** A college, university, technical, or business school offering post-secondary level academic instruction that leads to an associate degree or higher degree if the school is empowered by the appropriate State education authority under State law to grant an associate or higher degree. When there is no State law to authorize the granting of a degree, an IHL includes a school which is accredited for degree programs by a recognized accrediting agency, or a school which is a recognized candidate for accreditation as a degree-granting school by one of the national or regional accrediting associations and has been licensed or chartered by the appropriate State authority as a degree-granting institution. (See [38 CFR 21.4200(h)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4c73d4646f06dc4ddfb21ecc298465e9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14200))

**IMPLEMENTATION DATE** The date a rule or law was put into effect.

**INDEPENDENT STUDY** A course which consists of a prescribed program of study with provision for interaction between the student and the regularly employed faculty of the school and is offered without any regularly scheduled conventional classroom or laboratory sessions. (See [38 CFR 21.4267(b)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=e3f75d924e9bdfe1ef388c597b7069d7&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14267))

**INDIVIDUAL READY RESERVE (IRR)** An individual who receives no pay and is not obligated to drill, conduct annual training, or participate in any military activities until activated by the Presidential Reserve Call-Up Authority.

**INTERVAL PAYMENT** Educational assistance benefits paid during the intervals between terms at a school or between terms when transferring from one school to another while the student is in the same program. Persons on active duty or training at the less than one-half time rate in the preceding term are not entitled to interval payments. The payment of intervals has been eliminated as of August 1, 2011.

**INTERACTIVE VOICE RESPONSE (IVR)** Claimants who must submit monthly verifications of their enrollment may call a toll free telephone number which uses IVR technology to report their attendance.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**JOURNEYMAN** Someone who completed an apprenticeship program and is fully trained in a trade or craft, but who is not yet a master.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**KICKERS** Amounts contributed by DOD to an education fund on behalf of participants to encourage enlistment or retention in the Armed Forces. The military services may use different terms such as "Army College Fund" or "Navy College Fund", etc. These amounts are added to any other education benefits to which the person may be entitled.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**LACAS (LICENSING AND CERTIFICATION APPROVAL SYSTEM)** An Internet based database application for licensing and certification approvals.

**LUMP SUM PAYMENT** An amount of educational assistance paid for the entire term, quarter, or semester.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**MATRICULATED STUDENT** A college or university student who has satisfied all prerequisites for formal admission and recognition by the institution as a degree-seeking student. This does not mean that an undergraduate student must have formally been accepted into a specific major field of study before he or she may be classified as "matriculated."

**MAP-D (MODERN AWARD PROCESSING - DEVELOPMENT)** This is an application designed to facilitate the development phase of claims processing, giving VSRs (Veterans Service Representatives) one tool to use to perform this work, and automate steps wherever possible.

**MGIB (MONTGOMERY GI BILL-ACTIVE DUTY)** This refers to the Montgomery GI Bill-Active Duty ([chapter 30 of title 38, U.S. Code](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title38/part3/chapter30&edition=prelim)).

**MGIB-SR (MONTGOMERY GI BILL-SELECTED RESERVE)** This refers to the Montgomery GI Bill-Selected Reserve ([chapter 1606 of title 10, U.S. Code](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title10/subtitleE/part4/chapter1606&edition=prelim)).

**MHA** This is the abbreviation for Monthly Housing Allowance. This is used in Chapter 33 benefits.

**MINQ (MASTER RECORD INQUIRY)** A BDN command used to look at specific education BDN master records.

**MITIGATING CIRCUMSTANCES** Unforeseen circumstances beyond a claimant's control that prevent him or her from pursuing a program of education. (See [38 CFR 21.7020(b)(19)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=039b17a5a870c118b26e0de82fab6c8e&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17020))

**M/R (MASTER RECORD)** This is an abbreviation for a BDN master record.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**NATIONAL CALL TO SERVICE (NCS)** An incentive program (benefit) provided to those who perform a period of national service. It is a DOD program that is administered by VA in which participants may choose from a list of incentives (cash bonus of $5,000; repayment of a qualifying student loan not to exceed $18,000; entitlement to allowance equal to the three-year monthly MGIB rate for 12 months; entitlement to allowance equal to 50% of the less-than-three-year MGIB rate for 36 months; coordination with MGIB benefits).

**NCD (NON-COLLEGE DEGREE)** The designation "NCD" is used to refer to a course or program of education or vocational training which does not lead to a standard college degree. Non-college degree training includes programs that produce career-specific diploma or professional certifications. Training is designed to advance an individual’s skills, especially in relation to his or her present or future job. Non-college degree programs include training for jobs that are based on manual or practical activities related to a specific trade, occupation, or vocation. They do not normally include training for a specific profession. Examples of non-college degree training are diploma vocational schools such as HVAC certification, truck driving, EMT certification, or barber/beautician school.

**NOAA (NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION)** This is an agency in the Department of Commerce that maps the oceans and conserves their living resources; predicts changes to the earth's environment; provides weather reports and forecasts floods and hurricanes and other natural disasters related to weather.

**NOBE (NOTICE OF BASIC ELIGIBILITY)** A DD Form 2384, Selected Reserve Educational Assistance Program Notice of Basic Eligibility, which the Selected Reserve member obtains from his or her National Guard or reserve component verifying his or her eligibility to the Montgomery GI Bill-Selected Reserve (MGIB-SR). If available, this form should accompany the reservist's application for benefits.

**NOD (NOTICE OF DEATH)** See [FNOD](#fnod).

**NOD (NOTICE OF DISAGREEMENT)** An abbreviation for the first step in the appellate procedure.

**NOE (NOTICE OF EXCEPTION)** System-generated messages which indicate such things as new information from DOD, award input errors, returned checks, or delinquent certifications.

**NON-MATRICULATED STUDENT** A student who is enrolled in courses at an IHL, who either has not completed all prerequisites for admission into a degree program or does not choose to attain recognition as a degree-seeking student.

**NON-PUNITIVE GRADE** Any grade assigned for pursuit of a course, whether upon completion of the course or at the time of withdrawal from the course, which has the effect of excluding the course from any consideration in determining progress toward fulfillment of requirements for graduation. No credit toward the school’s requirements for graduation is granted for such a grade, nor does the grade affect any other criteria for graduation by the policies of the school, such as a grade point average. Therefore, it has the same effect as an audited course. (See [38 CFR 21.4200(j)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4c73d4646f06dc4ddfb21ecc298465e9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14200))

**NON-STANDARD TERM** A term which is of a shorter or longer length (e.g., weeks and days) than a standard quarter or semester. (See [QUARTER](#q), [SEMESTER](#sem))

**NORMAL COMMUTING DISTANCE** The basic definition for two locations within 55 miles of each other. A branch, extension, or additional facility of a school located more than 55 miles from the school's main campus or parent facility may be considered within normal commuting distance only if school records show that, before the establishment of the additional teaching site, at least 20 students (or 5 percent of the enrollment, whichever is less) on the main campus or parent facility were regularly commuting from the area where the additional teaching site is located; or other comparable evidence clearly shows that students commute regularly between the two locations. (See [38 CFR 21.4200(m)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4c73d4646f06dc4ddfb21ecc298465e9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14200))

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**OBJECTIVE** The final educational, professional, or vocational goal of a Veteran, Serviceperson, or eligible person (e.g., degree, diploma, certificate, occupation).

**OJT (ON-THE-JOB TRAINING)** Training done while performing a job and earning wages. Examples of OJT training include union plumber, hotel management, or firefighter.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**PCAN (PENDING ISSUE CANCEL)** A BDN command used to cancel pending EPCs.

**PCHG (PENDING ISSUE CHANGE)** A BDN command used to change a pending EPC to a different EPC.

**PCGL** The computer program used to produce locally produced letters at each RPO.

**PCLR (PENDING ISSUE CLEAR)** A BDN command used to clear an EPC.

**PERSIAN GULF WAR** The period beginning on August 2, 1990, and ending on a date to be prescribed by Presidential proclamation or by law. The term includes Somalia, Rwanda and similar humanitarian/police actions. (See [38 CFR 7020(b)(41)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=039b17a5a870c118b26e0de82fab6c8e&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17020))

**PIF (PENDING ISSUE FILE)** The information stored in BDN while an EPC is in a pending status.

**PINQ (PENDING ISSUE INQUIRY)** A BDN command used to review the information in a pending EPC.

**POA (POWER OF ATTORNEY)** The individual that a claimant has appointed to represent him or her. Generally this is an approved Veterans’ Service Organization but it may be a specific individual.

**POST-9/11 GI BILL (CHAPTER 33)** The Post-9/11 GI Bill provides financial support to service members, veterans, and eligible dependents who attend education or training programs taken at accredited colleges or universities and at accredited schools or programs that do not grant college degrees (non-college degree or NCD programs). To be eligible, individuals must have either at least 90 days of total service on or after September 11, 2001; or a military discharge and a service-connected disability after 30 days of service.

**PPU (PAYMENT PROCESSING UNIT)** A special division of the Hines BDC (Benefits Delivery Center) that modifies chapter 32 master records in certain situations.

**PRIMARY INSTITUTION** The institution which will grant the current degree sought, or certifies that the student has completed the program qualifying him or her for the current objective sought.

**PRIOR CREDIT** Credit previously earned and transferred which is creditable to the particular degree or other educational objective being pursued by the Veteran or eligible person.

**PROFESSIONAL OR VOCATIONAL OBJECTIVE** A professional or vocational objective is one that leads to an occupation. It may include educational objectives essential to prepare for the chosen occupation. When a program consists of a series of courses not leading to an educational objective, these courses must be directed toward attainment of a designated professional or vocational objective. (See [38 CFR 21.7020(b)(22)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=039b17a5a870c118b26e0de82fab6c8e&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17020))

**PROGRAM OF EDUCATION** A combination of subjects, unit courses, or training activities pursued at a school or training establishment which is generally accepted as necessary to meet requirements for a predetermined educational, professional, or vocational objective (e.g., diploma, degree, certificate, occupation).

**PRO-RATE** A term which means to divide or distribute a sum of money proportionately.

**PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE (PHS)** The Public Health Service (PHS) is the operating division of the Health and Human Services Department (HHS) responsible for promoting the protection and advancement of the American population's physical and mental well-being.

**PUNITIVE GRADE** A grade assigned for pursuit of a course which is used in determining the student’s overall progress toward completion of the school’s requirements for graduation. Unlike the non-punitive grade, the punitive grade does affect the criteria to be met by the student for graduation, (i.e., it is a factor in computing the student’s grade average or grade point average). (See [38 CFR 21.4200(k)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4c73d4646f06dc4ddfb21ecc298465e9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14200))

**PURSUIT** This is the definition of a student working, while enrolled, toward the objective of a program of education. This work must be in accordance with approved institution policy and regulations and applicable criteria of title 38, U.S. Code. The work must be necessary to reach the program's objective; and must be accomplished through courses as shown in [38 CFR 21.4200(o)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4c73d4646f06dc4ddfb21ecc298465e9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14200).

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**QUARTER** A division of the ordinary school year, usually a period from 10 to 13 weeks long. (See [38 CFR 21.4200(b)(3)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4c73d4646f06dc4ddfb21ecc298465e9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14200))

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**RAD (RELEASED FROM ACTIVE DUTY)** This is an abbreviation for the date that a Veteran was released from active duty.

**RATE OF PURSUIT** The number of course hours or credits a student takes at an institution divided by the number of credits considered full-time at that institution. This is usually rounded to the nearest hundredth (if it is .5, round up). Rate of Pursuit is generally only used for chapter 33 benefits.

**REAP (Reserve Educational Assistance Program)** Education program often referred to as [Chapter 1607 of title 10 U.S.C. Code](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title10/subtitleE/part4/chapter1607&edition=prelim). REAP has a sunset date of November 25, 2015. No new applications may be received after that date.

**REFRESHER COURSE** Either a course at the elementary or secondary level to review or update material previously covered in a course that has been satisfactorily completed or a course which permits an individual to update knowledge and skills or be instructed in the technological advances which have occurred in the individual’s field of employment during and since the period of the individual’s active military service. (See [38 CFR 7020(b)(26)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=039b17a5a870c118b26e0de82fab6c8e&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17020))

**REMEDIAL COURSE** A course designed to overcome a deficiency at the elementary or secondary level in a particular area of study, or a handicap, such as in speech. (See [38 CFR 21.7020(b)(27)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=039b17a5a870c118b26e0de82fab6c8e&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17020))

**REPORTING FEE** A fee paid annually to each educational institution furnishing training under the various VA education programs for required reports or certifications. This fee is intended to help defray the costs of processing various reports and certifications required to be submitted to VA and are in lieu of any other compensation or reimbursement.

**REPS (RESTORED ENTITLEMENT PROGRAM FOR SURVIVORS)** A benefit which restores certain Social Security benefits that were reduced or terminated by the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981, Public Law 97-35. Certain survivors of deceased Veterans who died of service-connected causes incurred or aggravated before August 13, 1981, are eligible for benefits.

**RESEARCH IN ABSENTIA** Research activity necessary for the preparation of the student's master's thesis, doctoral dissertation, or a similar thesis which is a prerequisite to the degree being pursued and is pursued outside a normal classroom setting.

**RESERVIST** A member of a military reserve component who is eligible for educational assistance under 10 U.S.C., chapter 1606 or chapter 1607. (See [38 CFR 21.7520(a)(1)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=16ab6400db211fd78c5070281cd0bc48&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17520))

**RESU (RESUME)** A BDN command used to activate a suspended master record.

**RIF (REDUCTION IN FORCE)** An abbreviation showing that the military has released the person from the military unit due to downsizing.

**RPO (Regional Processing Office)** An abbreviation for the VA office that processes education claims.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**SCHOOL LIABILITY** Liability assessed against a school as a result of the willful or negligent failure of the school to report to VA the discontinuance or interruption of a course, or the willful or negligent false certification by an educational institution.

**SCHOOL YEAR** Generally, a period of 2 semesters or 3 quarters which is not less than 30 nor more than 39 weeks in total length. (See [38 CFR 21.4200(b)(1)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4c73d4646f06dc4ddfb21ecc298465e9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14200))

**SCO (School Certifying Official)** This is the same as a [Certifying Official](#co).

**SELECTED RESERVE** The Selected Reserve of the Ready Reserve of any of the reserve components of the Armed Forces of the United States, including the Army Reserve, Naval Reserve, Air Force Reserve, Marine Corps Reserve, Army National Guard and Air National Guard, and the Coast Guard Reserve. (See [38 CFR 21.7020(b)(31)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=039b17a5a870c118b26e0de82fab6c8e&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17020))

**SEMESTER** A division of the ordinary school year, usually a period from 15 to 19 weeks long. (See [38 CFR 21.4200(b)(4)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4c73d4646f06dc4ddfb21ecc298465e9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14200))

**SERVICEPERSON** An individual who is currently serving on active duty. Same as "Servicemember."

**SHARE** This application is the gateway into the VETSNET world, which simultaneously establishes a claim control in both the BDN PIF and MAP-D. For Education Service, Payment History Inquiries may be viewed in this program, as well as the eligibility status of Chapter 31 (VR&E) benefits.

**SINQ (STATUS INQUIRY)** A BDN command used to determine the status of a claimant's record in BDN (such as a pending issue or a resulting master record).

**SMALL BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT CENTER (SBDC)** A U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) entity hosted by leading universities and state economic development agencies to provide assistance to small businesses and aspiring entrepreneurs throughout the United States and its territories to realize the dream of business ownership and help existing businesses remain competitive in a complex, ever-changing global marketplace.

**SPECIAL PAYMENT** Expedited payments made when a delay in issuing payment has caused financial hardship for a student.

**STANDARD COLLEGE DEGREE** An associate or higher degree awarded by an IHL that is accredited as a collegiate institution by a recognized regional or national accrediting agency or an IHL that is a candidate for accreditation, or an institution accredited by an agency recognized to accredit specialized degree-level programs. (See [38 CFR 21.4200(e)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4c73d4646f06dc4ddfb21ecc298465e9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14200))

**STATE APPROVING AGENCY (SAA)** An agency appointed by the Chief Executive of a state to approve programs of education and training for payment of benefits under the various education program laws administered by VA.

**SUMMER SESSION** A division of the summer term specifically designated in a school catalog as a distinct period of instruction. These sessions vary in length, and are often only 3 to 8 weeks long. (See [38 CFR 21.4200(b)(6)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4c73d4646f06dc4ddfb21ecc298465e9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14200))

**SUMMER TERM** The whole of the period of instruction at a school which takes place between ordinary school years. A summer term may be divided into several summer sessions. (See [38 CFR 21.4200(b)(5)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4c73d4646f06dc4ddfb21ecc298465e9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14200))

**SUPPLEMENTAL EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE** A benefit payable to a Veteran or Serviceperson as a supplement to his or her basic educational assistance for pursuit of a program of education under 38 U.S.C., chapter 30. (See [38 CFR 21.7020(b)(34)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=039b17a5a870c118b26e0de82fab6c8e&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17020))

**SUSP (SUSPEND)** A BDN command used to suspend BDN payments.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**TRANSFER OF EDUCATION BENEFITS (TEB)** The website used by a service member to indicate an irrevocable election to allow a dependent to use his/her education benefits. The TEB website is maintained by the Department of Defense and is viewed through VIS.

**TIMS (THE IMAGING MANAGEMENT SYSTEM)** The electronic folder management system used to maintain all education folders at each RPO.

**TERM** This is any regularly established division of the ordinary school year under which a school operates.

**TINQ (TREASURY INQUIRY)** A BDN command used to review check and EFT (Electronic Fund Transfer) payment information. This information is now available via [SHARE](#share).

**TRAINING ESTABLISHMENT** Any establishment providing apprentice or other training on-the-job, including those under the supervision of a college or university or any state department of education, or any state apprenticeship agency, or any state board of vocational education, or any joint apprenticeship committee, or the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training established in accordance with [29 U.S.C., Chapter 4C](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title29/chapter4C&edition=prelim), or any agency of the federal government authorized to supervise such training. (See [38 CFR 21.4200(c)](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4c73d4646f06dc4ddfb21ecc298465e9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14200))

**TRAINING TIME** The rate (i.e., full time or part time) of an eligible person's training that is determined by the number of credit or clock hours the student takes. The training time determines the monthly rate of payment.

**TRANSFEROR** An individual who is entitled to educational assistance under the Post-9/11 GI bill based on his or her own active duty service and who is approved by the military department to transfer all or a portion of his or her entitlement to one or more dependents or transferees.

**TUTORIAL ASSISTANCE** An allowance paid to eligible persons to supplement their monthly educational assistance. Tutorial assistance may be paid to eligible persons to aid in defraying the expenses incurred by the need for tutoring.

**TWO-YEAR RULE** A minimum period of operation required of some educational institutions to obtain approval of its programs for VA training. (See [38 CFR 21.4251](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4c73d4646f06dc4ddfb21ecc298465e9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14251))

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**UNDERGRADUATE COLLEGE DEGREE** A college or university degree obtained through the pursuit of unit subjects which are below the graduate level. These include associate degrees, bachelor's degrees and first professional degrees. (See [38 CFR 21.4200(f)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4c73d4646f06dc4ddfb21ecc298465e9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14200))

**UNIFORMED SERVICES MEMBERS** of the Unites States Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, and Coast Guard, including the reserve components thereof.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**VA** Department of Veterans Affairs. This may also be abbreviated DVA.

**VA ONCE** (Decommissioned March 6, 2023, replaced with Enrollment Manager) A personal computer program that allows school certifying officials to create and transfer enrollment information directly to an RPO for processing.

**VACOLS (VETERAN APPEALS CONTROL AND LOCATOR SYSTEM)** A unified tracking system for appeals.

**VADS (VETERANS ASSISTANCE DISCHARGE SYSTEM)** A letter-generating system that contains selected DD Form 214 information of discharged Veterans. The information for the VADS record comes from the DD Form 214 and is entered into the system at the Austin DPC (Data Processing Center).

**VBA (VETERANS BENEFITS ADMINISTRATION)** The VA organization which processes benefits.

**VEAP (VETERANS' EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM)** A contributory educational assistance program provided for Post-Vietnam Era Veterans under [chapter 32 of title 38, U.S. Code](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title38/part3/chapter32&edition=prelim).

**VETERAN** A person who served in the active military, naval, or air service. The definition in [38 U.S.C. 1.01(2)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:101 edition:prelim)) requires the person to be discharged or released from service under conditions under than dishonorable. There are different definitions for the term Veteran throughout the regulations. For example, a Veteran under [Chapter 32 of 38 U.S.C.](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title38/part3/chapter32&edition=prelim) is an individual who meets the service requirements for a Veteran as defined in the [38 CFR 21.5040](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4c73d4646f06dc4ddfb21ecc298465e9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15040); and a Veteran under [Chapter 30 of 38 U.S.C.](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title38/part3/chapter30&edition=prelim) is an individual who meets the service requirements for a Veteran under [38 CFR 21.7042](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=4c73d4646f06dc4ddfb21ecc298465e9&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17042).

**VETERANS ASSISTANCE INQUIRY (VAI)** An inquiry regarding questioned amounts of VA monetary benefits, or the non-receipt of such benefits after the anticipated claims processing time has elapsed.

**VETERAN INFORMATION SOLUTIONS (VIS)** An intranet-based application designed to provide a consolidated view of information abut Veterans and Active Service Members.

**VR&E (Veteran Readiness and Employment Service)** The VA staff that provides Veteran Readiness and Employment  Services to Veterans. This is also known as Chapter 31 benefits.

**VETERANS RETRAINING ASSISTANCE PROGRAM (VRAP)** Provided training for programs of education which led to a high demand occupation, as determined by the Department of Labor.

**VONAPP** Veterans On-Line Application

**VOR (VETSNET OPERATIONS REPORTS)** This is a multi-level, online reporting suite of pending, completed, cancelled, and future control claims. Information displayed in VOR is based on the Benefits Delivery Network (BDN) Pending Issue File (PIF) and enhanced with VETSNET data (i.e., MAP-D inputs) to provide more information. VOR replaced the BDN Work-in-Progress Subsystem (WIPP), PIF, and Inventory Management System (IMS) reports as the principal Veterans Service Center (VSC) workload management tool.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**WARMS (WEB AUTOMATED REFERENCE MATERIAL SYSTEM)** An Internet based system for accessing all of VBA's publications.

**WAVE (WEB AUTOMATED VERIFICATION OF ENROLLMENT)** An Internet application which allows claimants to submit monthly verifications of enrollment information via the Internet.

**WEB ENABLED APPROVAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (WEAMS)** WEAMS is the database for approved educational and job training programs, licensing and certification tests, and national exams maintained in VA corporate environment.

**WIPP (WORK-IN-PROGRESS)** A BDN subsystem that assists management in identifying areas which require attention and analysis.

**WORK STUDY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (WSMS)** Web-based system to assist with maintaining work study management applications, time sheets, and payments.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**YELLOW RIBBON PROGRAM (YR)** The Yellow Ribbon program allows institutions of higher learning (degree-granting colleges and universities) in the United States to voluntarily enter into an agreement with VA to fund tuition expenses that exceed the maximum amount of tuition and fee benefits payable under Chapter 33. Participating schools can waive up to 50% of those expenses, and VA will match the same amount as the institution.

[Go To Top](#top)

---

**48 MONTH RULE (ENTITLEMENT LIMITATION)** Most individuals eligible for two or more VA education programs may not exceed 48 months of entitlement.

 

**70/80 PERCENT RULE** If the aggregate service including training is at least 24 months (730-909 days) but less than 30 months (910-1094 days) AND the aggregate service excluding training is at least 18 months (545-729 days) but less than 24 months, the individual will be deemed eligible at the 70% benefit level. This rule only applies to the Post-9/11 GI Bill (Chapter 33).

[Go To Top](#top)

|  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **APPENDIX:  ACRONYMS** | |  |
| AAFC | Agent and Attorney Fee Coordinator |  |
| ACDUTRA | Active Duty for Training |  |
| ACL | Access Control List |  |
| ACT | American College Test |  |
| AEO | Assistant Education Officer |  |
| AGR | Active Guard Reserve |  |
| AIS | Automated Information System |  |
| AITC | Austin Information Technology Center |  |
| ALAC | Administrative Loan and Accounting Center |  |
| AMA | Appeals Modernization Act (aka Veterans Appeals Improvement and Modernization Act of 2017 |  |
| AP | Advanced Payment |  |
| AP | Advanced Placement Exam |  |
| APO | Army Post Office |  |
| APP | Apprenticeship |  |
| AR | Accounts Receivable |  |
| ATA | Attachment Technology Advancement |  |
| AWOL | Absent Without Leave |  |
|  | [Go To Top](#top) |  |
| BAH | Basic Allowance for Housing |  |
| BDN | Benefits Delivery Network |  |
| BEST | Benefits Eligibility Support Team |  |
| BET | Back End Tool |  |
| BIRLS | Beneficiary Identification and Records Locator Subsystem |  |
| BoS | Branch of Service |  |
| BPA | Blanket Purchase Agreement |  |
| BVA | Board of Veterans Appeals |  |
|  | [Go To Top](#top) |  |
| C&P | Compensation and Pension |  |
| CAATS | Centralized Administrative Accounting Transaction System |  |
| CADD | Change of Address(This is a BDN command.) |  |
| CADJ | Claims Adjudication (This is a BDN command.) |  |
| CAROLS | Centralized Accounts Receivable Online System |  |
| CARP | Chapter 32 Account Receivables Program |  |
| CARS | Centralized Accounts Receivable System |  |
| CAUT | Claim Authorization (This is a BDN command.) |  |
| CAVC | The Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims |  |
| CELO | Chief Education Liaison Officer |  |
| CERT | Certification (This is a BDN command.) |  |
| CEST | Claim Establishment (This is a BDN command.) |  |
| CFO | Chief Financial Officer |  |
| CFR | Code of Federal Regulations |  |
| CH | Chapter |  |
| CHAIRS | Chapter 35 Alternate Input Replacement System |  |
| CHAR | Character of Discharge |  |
| CIP | Classification of Instructional Programs |  |
| CLEP | College-Level Examination Program |  |
| CNAM | Change of Name (This is a BDN command.) |  |
| COD | Certificate of Delivery |  |
| COE | Certificate of Eligibility |  |
| COG | Convenience of the Government |  |
| COOP | Cooperative Training |  |
| CORR | Correction (This is a BDN command.) |  |
| COWC | Committee on Waivers and Compromises |  |
| CP&E | Compensation, Pension and Education |  |
| CSS | Common Security Services |  |
| CST | Customer Service Tracking |  |
| CWVV | Children of Women Vietnam Veterans Born with Certain Defects Program |  |
|  | [Go To Top](#top) |  |
| DAT | Dental Admissions Test |  |
| DD | Drop Down |  |  |
| DD | Direct Deposit |  |
| DEA | Dependents Educational Assistance Program |  |
| DEERS | Defense Enrollment Eligibility Reporting System |  |
| DFAS | Defense Finance and Accounting Service |  |
| DIC | Dependency and Indemnity Compensation |  |
| DLC | Date Last Certified |  |
| DLP | Date Last Paid |  |
| DMC | Debt Management Center |  |
| DMDC | Defense Manpower Data Center |  |
| DNC | Data Networks Corporation |  |
| DOB | Date of Birth |  |
| DOD | Department of Defense |  |
| DOD | Date of Death |
| DOM | Date of Marriage |
| DON | Date of Notification |
| DOOR | Distribution of Operational Resources |  |
| DOR | Date of Rating |  |
| DPRIS | Defense Personnel Records Information Retrieval System |  |
| DSO | Designated Security Officer |  |
| DUPC | Duplicate Claim (This is a BDN command.) |  |
| DVA | Department of Veterans Affairs |  |
|  | [Go To Top](#top) |  |
| EAJA | Equal Access to Justice |  |
| ECAP | Electronic Certification Automated Processing |  |
| ECE | Excelsior College Exam |  |
| ECM | Education Case Manager |  |
| ECS | Electronic Certification System |  |
| ECSS | Education Compliance Survey Specialist |  |
| EDMS | Education Development Management System |  |
| EEO | Equal Employment Opportunity |  |
| EFT | Electronic Fund Transfers |  |
| ELIG | Eligibility |  |
| ELR | Education Liaison Representative |  |
| ELS | Education Liaison Specialist |  |
| ENT | Entitlement |  |
| EO | Education Officer |  |
| EOD | Entered on Duty |  |
| EP | End Product |  |
| EPC | End Product Code |  |
| EQTS | Education Quality and Training Specialist |  |
| ETS | Expiration of Term of Service |  |
|  | [Go To Top](#top) |  |
|  |  |  |
| FAA | Federal Aviation Administration |  |
| FAQ | Frequently Asked Questions |  |
| FAS | Finance and Accounting System |  |
| FAUT | Fiscal Authorization (This is a BDN command.) |  |
| FDIB | Funds Due Incompetent Beneficiaries |  |
| FET | Front End Tool |  |
| FFP | Full File Pass |  |
| FIST | Fiscal Transfer (This is a BDN command.) |  |
| FLT | Flight Training |  |
| FMS | Financial Management System |  |
| FNOD | First Notice of Death |  |
| FOCAS | Flight, On-the-Job Training, Correspondence, and Apprentice System |  |
| FOES | Fiscal Notice of Exception |  |
| FPLS | Federal Parent Locator Service |  |
| FPO | Fleet Post Office |  |
| FRD | Functional Requirements Document |  |
| FRPT | Fiscal Report |  |
| FSC | Financial Services Center |  |
| FT | Full-Time |  |
| FTP | File Transfer Protocol |  |
|  | [Go To Top](#top) |  |
| GAD | Generate and Display (This is a BDN command.) |  |
| GAO | Government Accountability Office |  |
| GAP | Generate and Print (This is a BDN command.) |  |
| GED | Generate Eligibility Determination |  |
| GMAT | Graduate Management Admission Test |  |
| GPF | General Post Fund |  |
| GRE | Graduate Record Exam |  |
| GSA | U.S. General Services Administration |  |
| GWOT | Global War on Terror |  |
|  | [Go To Top](#top) |  |
| HAC | Health Administration Center |  |
| HITC | Hines Information Technology Center |  |
| HON | Honorable |  |
|  | [Go To Top](#top) |  |
| IADT | Initial Active Duty for Training |  |
| ID | Identification |  |
| IHL | Institution of Higher Learning |  |
| IPAC | Intra-Governmental Payment and Collection System VBA 2 ESD-CM03-6424-003 |  |
| IRM | Information Resource Management |  |
| IRR | Individual Ready Reserve |  |
| IT | Information Technology |  |
| ITC | Information Technology Center |  |
| IVR | Interactive Voice Response |  |
|  | [Go To Top](#top) |  |
| JAD | Joint Application Development |  |
| KM | Knowledge Management |  |
|  | [Go To Top](#top) |  |
| L2V | Letters to Veterans |  |
| LACAS | Licensing and Certification Approval System |  |
| LOB | Line of Business |  |
| LSAT | Law School Admission Test |  |
| LTS | Long Term Solution |  |
|  | [Go To Top](#top) |  |
| MA | Management Analyst |  |
| MCAT | Medical College Admissions Test |  |
| MGIB | Montgomery GI Bill |  |
| MGIB | Montgomery GI Bill: Active Duty |  |
| MGIB-SR | Montgomery GI Bill: Selected Reserve |  |
| MHA | Monthly Housing Allowance |  |
| MINQ | Master Record Inquiry (This is a BDN command.) |  |
| MR | Master Record |  |
|  | [Go To Top](#top) |  |
| N/A | Not Applicable |  |
| NCD | Non-College Degree |  |
| NCOA | National Change of Address |  |
| NIST | National Institute of Standards and Technology |  |
| NOAA | National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration |  |
| NOBE | Notice of Basic Eligibility |  |
| NOD | Notice of Disagreement |  |
| NOE | Notice of Exceptions |  |
| NOES | Notice of Exception |  |
| NPRC | National Personnel Records Center |  |
| NSC | Non- Service Connected |  |
|  | [Go To Top](#top) |  |
| OAT | Optometry Admissions Testing |  |
| OCSE | Office of Child Support Enforcement |  |
| OEF | Operation Afghanistan Freedom |  |
| OIF | Operation Iraqi Freedom |  |
| OIM | Office of Information Management |  |
| OJT | On-the-Job Training |  |
| OOS | Out of System |  |
| OPA&I | Office of Performance Analysis and Integrity |  |
| OPC | Outpatient Clinic |  |
| ORM | Office of Resolution Management |  |
| OSAP | Out of System Award Processing |  |
| OSvC | Oracle Service Cloud (aka Right Now Web [RNW]) |  |
|  | [Go To Top](#top) |  |
| P/T   P&T | Permanent and Total |  |
| PA&I | Performance Analysis & Integrity |  |
| PC | Personal Computer |  |
| PCAN | Pending Issue Cancel (This is a BDN command.) |  |
| PCAT | Pharmacy College Admissions Test |  |
| PCGL | Personal Computer-Generated Letter |  |
| PCHG | Pending Issue Change (This is a BDN command.) |  |
| PCL | Project Control Log |  |
| PCLR | Pending Issue Clear (This is a BDN command.) |  |
| PFOP | Personal Funds of Patients |  |
| PHS | Public Health Service |  |
| PIES | Personnel Information Exchange System |  |
| PIF | Pending Issue File |  |
| POA | Power of Attorney |  |
| POC | Point of Contact |  |
| PPU | Payment Processing Unit |  |
|  | [Go To Top](#top) |  |
| RAD | Released from Active Duty |  |
| RBA | Rating Board Automation |  |
| RDP | Regional Data Processing |  |
| REAP | Reservists Educational Assistance Program |  |
| RECERT | Re-certification |  |
| REPS | Restored Entitlement Program for Survivors |  |
| RFL | Revolving Fund Loan |  |
| RLC | Regional Loan Center |  |
| RNW | Right Now Web |  |
| RO | Regional Office |  |
| ROP | Rate of Pursuit |  |
| RPO | Regional Processing Office |  |
| RVSR | Rating Veterans Service Representative |  |
|  | [Go To Top](#top) |  |
| SAA | State Approving Agency |  |
| SAH | Specially Adapted Housing |  |
| SAT | Scholastic Assessment Test |  |
| SC | Service Connected |  |
| SCD | Service Connected Disability |  |
| SCO | School Certifying Official |  |
| SD | Service Department |  |
| SDLC | Systems Development Life Cycle |  |
| SDVI | Service-Disabled Veterans Insurance |  |
| SGLI | Servicemembers' Group Life Insurance |  |
| SHA | Special Home Adaptation |  |
| SME | Subject Matter Expert |  |
| SPP | Search and Participant Profile |  |
| SPS | Secure Payment System |  |
| SRT | Special Restorative Training |  |
| SSD | Support Services Division |  |
| SSN | Social Security Number |  |
| SSO | Single Sign On |  |
| SUSP | Suspend (This is a BDN command.) |  |
| SVCE | Senior Veterans Claims Examiner |  |
| SVT | Specialized Vocational Training |  |
|  | [Go To Top](#top) |  |
| TATU | Tuition Assistance Top Up |  |
| TBD | To Be Determined |  |
| TCS | Target Central System |  |
| TDA | Transfer of Disbursing Authority |  |
| TEES | The Education Expert System |  |
| TIMS | The Image Management System |  |
| TINQ | Treasury Inquiry |  |
| TMS | Talent Management System |  |
| TOE | Transfer of Entitlement |  |
| TOEFL | Test of English as a Foreign Language |  |
| TRFC | Treasury Regional Financial Center |  |
| TSGLI | Servicemembers' Traumatic Injury Protection |  |
|  | [Go To Top](#top) |  |
| UAT | User Acceptance Testing |  |
| UNAS | Unassociated Balance Transaction |  |
| USAFI | US Armed Forces Institute |  |
| USC | United States Code |  |
|  | [Go To Top](#top) |  |
| VA | Department of Veterans Affairs |  |
| VACERT | VA Certification |  |
| VACO | Veterans Affairs Central Office |  |
| VACOLS | Veterans Appeals Control and Locator System |  |
| VADS | Veterans Assistance Discharge System |  |
| VAI | Veterans Assistance Inquiry |  |
| VAMC | VA Medical Center |  |
| VANTS | Veterans Affairs National Telecommunications System |  |
| VAONCE | Veterans Administration Online Certification of Enrollment |  |
| VBA | Veterans Benefits Administration |  |
| VBMS | Veterans Benefits Management System |  |
| VCE | Veterans Claims Examiner |  |
| VEAP | Post-Vietnam Era Veterans Educational Assistance Program |  |
| VETSNET | Veterans Service Network |  |
| VGLI | Veterans’ Group Life Insurance |  |
| VHA | Veterans Health Administration |  |
| VID | Veteran Identification Data |  |
| VIS | Veteran Information System |  |
| VMLI | Veterans Mortgage Life Insurance |  |
| VONAPP | Veterans Online Application |  |
| VR&E | Veteran Readiness and Employment Service Program |  |
| VRC | Vocational Rehabilitation Counselor |  |
| VRM | Veterans Relationship Management |  |
| VSC | Veterans Service Center formerly C&P- Compensation and Pension |  |
| VSO | Veterans Service Organization |  |
| VSR | Veterans Service Representative |  |
|  | [Go To Top](#top) |  |
| WAVE | Web Automated Verification of Enrollment |  |
| WEAMS | Web Enabled Approval Management System |  |
| WIPP | Work-In-Progress |  |
| WS | Work Study |  |
| WSMS | Work Study Management System |  |
|  |  |  |
| YR | Yellow Ribbon |  |
|  | [Go To Top](#top) |  |