# Chapter 33 Sub-Chapter 4.6 - Reimbursements, Fees, and Overpayments

**Chapter 33 Sub-Chapter 4.6 - Reimbursements, Fees, and Overpayments**  
   
This section provides information about miscellaneous payments and debts under Chapter 33.

[6.01 Reimbursement of $1200 MGIB Contribution](#601)

[6.02 Reporting Fees](#602)

[6.03 Interval Pay](#603)

[6.04 Rural Benefit (Relocation Allowance)](#604)

[6.05 Overpayments and Debts](#605)

**6.01 Reimbursement of $1200 Montgomery GI Bill (MGIB) Contribution**

---

**a. General**  
  
If a beneficiary relinquishes benefits under MGIB (chapter 30) to establish eligibility under Post-9/11 GI Bill (PGIB or chapter 33), he or she may be reimbursed for the unused portion of his/her $1200 contribution paid into MGIB. The payment is prorated if any entitlement was used under MGIB, and the payment is issued when entitlement under PGIB is exhausted.

**b. Eligibility for the of $1200 MGIB Refund**  
  
The following criteria must be met for reimbursement of the MGIB contribution:  
  
   •  The beneficiary must have been eligible for MGIB as a category I participant,  
  
   •  The beneficiary must have relinquished MGIB to establish eligibility under PGIB,  
  
   •  The beneficiary's PGIB entitlement must be exhausted,  
  
   •  The beneficiary must be in receipt of a monthly housing allowance when entitlement exhausts.

   •   Any entitlement transferred to dependents must have been used before the beneficiary's PGIB entitlement exhausted.

**c. Manual Calculation for the $1200 MGIB Refund**

The PGIB Processing System (DGI), after population with the MGIB contribution amount and MGIB remaining entitlement amount, will figure the correct refund amount.  The refund calculation is shown below for ad hoc calculations outside of DGI:

1. Determine the amount of MGIB entitlement remaining (in days) as of the date of election of PGIB.

2. Divide the amount from step 1 by 1,080.

3. Multiply the answer from step 2 by the beneficiary's total MGIB contribution (not to exceed $1,200). This is the amount of the refund due.

*Note: When MGIB was not used, a full refund is due (see* M22-4 Part 4 Chapter 13.23(3)(b)*for system limitation and workaround).  The MGIB refund may not exceed $1,200 and additional contributions (MGIB buy-up) are not refundable under PGIB.*

Example: Jane Johnson relinquishes MGIB for PGIB. At the time of relinquishing MGIB, she had 20 months and 21 days of entitlement remaining. She paid $1,200 into MGIB.  How much of a MGIB refund should Jane receive?

Answer:  
  
•   Determine the remaining MGIB entitlement (20 months and 21 days) in days. Since entitlement is always based on a 30-day month, take 20 months and multiple by 30 days for 600 days, and add 21 days for a total of 621 days.  
•   Divided 621 days by 1,080 days for a decimal of .575 (i.e. Jane had 57.5% of her MGIB entitlement remaining).  
•   Multiply $1,200 by .575 for a refund amount of $690.00.

***Sources:***  
  
*Electronic Code of Federal Regulations [§ 21.9645. Refund of basic contribution to chapter 30](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_19645)*

[Go To Top](#top)

**6.02 Reporting Fees**

---

**a. Reporting by IHLs**  
  
At the beginning of each calendar year, a list of students who received Veterans Administration (VA) education benefits during the previous calendar year is printed for each **institution of higher learning** (IHL). Based on the number of students who were certified to the VA at least once during the year and who received VA educational benefits, each institution is compensated $12 per student. If the institution delivered an advance payment check, compensation is increased to $15 for that student.

**b. Certification Fees**  
  
Effective October 1, 2011, reporting fees must be used solely for the purpose of making certifications or for otherwise supporting programs for veterans. This money is to help schools cover the cost of administering VA programs including, but not limited to, attendance at VA-sponsored training conferences. Errors in reporting fee amounts should be reported to the **Education Liaison Representative** (ELR) of jurisdiction.

***Sources:***  
  
***Part 12, Chapter 33. Chapter 12 - Public Laws and Regulations. Training Slides PL 111-377**, Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act of 2010, Title II Other Educational Assistance Matters, Sec. 204. Reporting fees  
  
Electronic Code of Federal Regulations [§ 21.9745 Reporting fee](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_19745)*

[Go To Top](#top)

**6.03 Interval Pay**

---

**a. Interval Pay**

Effective August 1, 2011, eligibility for ****interval pay**** (break pay) has been restricted to periods where a school is closed due to an Executive Order of the President or an emergency situation (such as a natural disaster or strike). These payments are limited to 4 weeks in any 12-month period.

***Sources:***  
  
***Part 12, Chapter 33. Chapter 12 - Public Laws and Regulations.Training Slides PL111-377**, Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act of 2010, Title II Other Educational Assistance Matters, SEC. 206. Modification of Authority to Make Certain Interval Payments*

[Go To Top](#top)

**6.04 Rural Benefit (Relocation Allowance)**

---

**a. Rural Benefit**  
  
The Rural Benefit is a one-time relocation payment of $500 (with no entitlement charge) for individuals who live in a county with no more than 6 people per square mile, as determined by the most recent decennial census; *and:*

* Physically relocate at least 500 miles to attend an educational institution;  
  ***OR***
* Travel by air to physically attend an educational institution if no other land-based transportation exists.

***Sources:***  
  
*Electronic Code of Federal Regulations [§ 21.9660 Rural relocation benefits](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_19660)*

[Go To Top](#top)

**6.05 Overpayments and Debts**

---

**a. Overpayments**

Sometimes a student receiving education benefits will need to drop classes or leave school for various reasons. In some cases, the VA will have already processed a payment for tuition and fees before the student has had a chance to alert the VA of the change in credit hours. This could result in an overpayment to the student.

Students receiving Chapter 33 benefits are liable for all tuition and fees paid to a school on his or her behalf unless:

* The overpayment is waived by the VA;
* The overpayment resulted from an administrative error or an error in judgment on the part of VA; or
* The individual never attended the term, quarter, or semester certified by the institution of higher learning. If the individual never attended the term, quarter, or semester certified by the IHL, the institution must return the funds paid on behalf of the individual to VA.

The school may still be liable for the debt if VA determines the school willfully or negligently:

* Provided false certification; or
* Failed to certify excessive absences from a course, discontinuance of a course, or interruption of a course by the eligible individual.

**b. Determining Amount of Overpayment**

The VA will determine the amount of an overpayment as follows:

* For an individual who does not complete one or more courses in the certified period of enrollment due to acceptable **mitigating circumstances**, the VA will prorate the amount of educational assistance to which he or she is entitled.

* For an individual who does not complete one or more courses in the certified period of enrollment, and who has not established the existence of acceptable mitigating circumstances, the overpayment will be equal the total amount of educational assistance paid for the course or courses not completed during that certified period of enrollment.

**c. Prorated Tuition and Fees**  
  
The VA will prorate the amount of the established charges by dividing the amount the individual was paid for the course(s) that were not completed by the number of days in the certified enrollment period, and multiplying the resulting quotient by the number of days from the beginning date of the enrollment period through the last date of attendance.  
  
The result of this calculation will equal the amount that the individual is due. The difference between the amount of educational assistance paid and the amount of educational assistance due for the course or courses not completed will be considered an overpayment and will need to be paid back to VA.**d. Prorated Housing Allowance**  
  
The monthly housing allowance (MHA) will be prorated for students who do not complete all classes by similarly determining the amount to the individual was entitled to while enrolled and subtracting that amount from the total amount paid. The difference between the amount of the MHA paid and the amount of the MHA due is the overpayment that will need to be paid back to VA.

**e. Prorated Books and Supplies Stipend**  
  
Individuals who have mitigating circumstances will not be charged an overpayment for the books and supplies stipend distributed for the quarter, term or semester if the student attended classes beyond the first day of the term.

***Sources:***  
  
*Electronic Code of Federal Regulations [§ 21.9695 Overpayments](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=ee9c16e5e75a6ecf23469e8bf4e5fa13&mc=true&node=pt38.2.21&rgn=div5#se38.2.21_19695)*

Last updated: October 6, 2015

[Go To Top](#top)

---