# Part 6: Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues

**Part 6: Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues**

[**Subchapter 1.**](#SI) **Certificate of Eligibility and Disallowance**  
[4.01  Certificate of Eligibility](#401)  
[4.02  Disallowances](#402)  
  
[**Subchapter 2.**](#SII) **BDN Processing Issues**  
[4.03  Chapter 32 Processing Problems](#403)  
[4.04  Section 903 Processing Problems](#404)   
[4.05  Awards Involving Dropped Prior BDN Award Lines](#405)  
  
[**Subchapter 3.**](#SIII) **Out-of-System Processing Issues**  
[4.06  Types of Actions Requiring Out-of-System Processing](#406)  
[4.07  Out-of-System Chapter 32 Disallowance Processing](#407)  
[4.08  Out-of-System Section 903 Disallowance Processing](#408)  
[4.09  Functions Performed by PPU and Buffalo RO Finance](#409)  
[4.10  Cooperative Training](#410)  
[4.11  Reduction of Benefits for Incarcerated Veterans](#411)  
[4.12  Flight, Apprenticeship, and OJT Awards](#412)  
[4.13  Bufflao RO Payment Processing Instructions for Apprenticeship/OJT, and Flight Awards](#413)  
[4.14  Other Award Considerations for Out-of-System Cases](#414)  
  
[**Subchapter 4.**](#SIV) **Other Award Processing Issues**  
[4.15  [Education] Coordinators](#415)  
[4.16  Claims Involving an Eight-Digit File Number](#416)  
[4.17  Changing Service Status of Claimant](#417)  
[4.18  Documentation for Original Awards or Certificates of Eligibility](#418)  
[4.19  Entitlement Computations](#419)  
[4.20  Elementary and Secondary Training](#420)  
[4.21  Chapter 32 Refund Procedures](#421)  
[4.22  Cert Issue Date Zeroed Out Report](#422)  
  
**Figures**  
[4.01  Sample Retired Pay Notification Letter](#f401)

 

**SUBCHAPTER I.  CERTIFICATE OF ELIGIBILITY AND DISALLOWANCE PROCEDURES**

*NOTE:  All procedures outlined below for chapter 32 processing also apply to section 903 processing unless specifically stated otherwise.*

**4.01  CERTIFICATE OF ELIGIBILITY**

---

Issue VA Form 22-1993a, Certificate of Eligibility (COE), if an application and other documentation establishing eligibility are received without an enrollment certification.  (See pt. III, ch. 9, subch. I, regarding VA Form 22-1993a.)

**4.02  DISALLOWANCES**

---

If the claim cannot be approved for any reason, the adjudicator or education claims clerk will prepare a disallowance.

**a.  General.**  The method used to prepare the disallowance depends on which adjudicative actions have preceded this disallowance.

(1)  Use BDN (Benefit Delivery Network) to disallow the claim if the claimant has no previous chapter 32 [BDN] benefit record (i.e., no M21 through M24 screens exist). (See RPO Letter 22-03-08).

(2)  Use the out-of-system procedures described in [paragraphs 4.07](#407) and [4.08](#408) if M21 through M24 screens exist.

(3)  For disallowance of claims for refunds in chapter 32 death cases, see paragraph 7.02.

**b.  Completion of the 310 Chapter 31/32/34 Eligibility Screen.**  Complete this screen before entering the 411 Education Disallowance screen, unless the claimant has no military service.  Instructions for completing the 310 screen are in chapter 3.

**c.  Completion of the 411 Education Disallowance Screen.**  Use the 411 screen to process a disallowance.  See chapter 2 for a description of how this screen works.

**d.  Letter Generation.**  Disallowance processing in most cases will generate a letter to the claimant with an explanation of the reason(s) for disallowance.  See chapter 6 for letter paragraphs.

(1)  Letter Suppressed or Not Generated.  If the letter is not generated or is suppressed, a dictated or form letter fully explaining the reason(s) for the disallowance must be sent to the claimant.  Attach VA Form 4-5281, Application for Refund of Educational Contributions.

(i)  No Appeal Involved.  If the claimant does not wish to appeal, he or she may request a refund of the contributions by completing VA Form 4-5281.  A request for refund does not prevent a later appeal or in any other way abridge the claimant's appellate rights. 

(ii)  Appeal Involved.  If the claimant wishes to appeal, he or she may request an immediate refund of contributions.  He or she may also defer the refund request pending a final decision on the appeal.  If the claimant gets a refund and the appeal is later granted, the claimant must restore full contributions to the chapter 32 account before any benefits are payable. 

(2)  Benefit Record Exists, Disallowance Letter Suppressed on Authorization.  If the disallowance letter is suppressed during the authorization stage (see par. 2.03e(3)) and a benefit account already exists, the 03E transaction converts to a transaction 03F.  The authorizer, adjudicator, or education clerk must annotate the VA Form 22-8945, Education Award sheet to show that the letter was suppressed and that the transaction was sent as an 03F. 

**SUBCHAPTER II.  BDN PROCESSING ISSUES**

**4.03  CHAPTER 32 PROCESSING PROBLEMS**

---

**a.  Change in Type of Training.**  When an award changes the type of training from IHL (Institution of Higher Learning) to NCD (Non-College Degree) or vice versa, Big Pay (see pt. II, par. 1.13d(2)) must run before several aspects of processing will be completed.

(1)  The following fields will not update until Big Pay has run:

(i)  TYP TRNG.

(ii)  FACILITY.

(iii)  COURSE/OBJ.

(iv)  DT LAST PD.

(v)  DT LAST CERT (see pt. II, ch. 3, for field descriptions.)

(2)  [BDN] cannot process certifications of attendance until the next Big Pay has run.

(i)  If at least 2 months in benefits will be due by the next Big Pay date or if retroactive benefits for at least 2 months are already due, request an 06G transaction from Finance in order to release a special payment.

(ii)  Whether or not an 06G is processed, maintain a local diary for the next Big Pay date.  Process certificates of attendance when the master record shows that the type of training, facility, code, and course and objective codes have been updated.  This will either clear the A/R (Account Receivable) established by the 06G or release payment due.

**b.  Advance Payment.**  Advance payment awards will only release payments during special advance payment cycles (2 or 3 each month as shown on the Schedule of Operations discussed in pt. II, par. 1.13) and during Big Pay.  When an advance payment is processed too late to release a timely check to the school and the next advance payment cycle or Big Pay is a week or more away, an 06G may be processed to release the amount due for the advance payment if there is a Benefit Daily Run scheduled between the date the 06G is processed and the date of the advance payment cycle or Big Pay.  (See pt. IV, par. 10.07.)  The A/R established by the 06G will clear with the next advance payment cycle or Big Pay.

*NOTE:  If the 06G procedure is used, a local diary must be maintained to verify attendance, because there is no system advance pay control.*

**c.  Certification of Attendance.**  Do not process NCD certification of attendance transactions before the first of the month following the month being certified as no payment will be released.  If a certification is processed in error (usually when an award ends before the end of the month), the DLC (Date Last Certified) will update to the end of the period certified but the DLP (Date Last Paid) will remain unchanged.  To release payment, process an amended award for the month that was certified.  Certification of attendance data should not be reentered for that period.

*NOTE:  For periods of attendance on or after December 18, 1989, only zeroes should be entered for absences.*

**d.  Retroactive Adjustment.**  When a NOE (Notice of Exception) message (see ch. 5) indicates that a retroactive adjustment to the banking record (M26-M29 [BDN] screens) has occurred, review the allotments to determine the nature of the change.

(1)  Timing of the Adjustment.  An immediate adjustment is not necessary if banking record changes take place that issue an NOE message while a person is on active duty.  Award adjustments retroactive to date of inception should not be made until the claimant is discharged or has posted the maximum amount of contributions ($2700).  Most other claims will require immediate adjustment.  The [RPO (Regional Processing Office) Education] Coordinator or Coordination team  should contact VACO Education Service, Systems staff, [Exchange mail box "[VAVBAWAS/CO/224A](mailto:VAVBAWAS/CO/224A?subject=Part%206%3A%20Chapter%204%20-%20Award%20Processing%20and%20Other%20Authorization%20Issues)" or by calling (202) 273-7169)] for problem cases.  Also, see [subparagraph (3)](#403d3) below.

(2)  Effective Dates of Changed Rates.  The M26, Ch32 Participant Account Summary, screen rates are based on remaining entitlement as of DLP and will not be the rates paid if a retroactive award is processed, although the M26 screen may show that a DOD contribution has been posted, indicating that a retroactive adjustment is due.  Check the dates the allotments changed.  Only the award dates effective after the dates when the allotments were posted as changed will change the rate of payment.

EXAMPLE:  Allotments from 1/91-12/91 increased to $100 monthly, but there was no change to allotments before 1/91.  Awards lines from 9/90-1/91 will not change rates.  The rate change will be effective 2/8/91, because the January allotment not received until mid-February.)

*NOTE:  Sometimes this action will create an overpayment.  If it does, do not adjust retroactively.*

(3)  $25 Allotment Cases, 6-Year Limit Reached.  On $25 allotment cases that have filled the 6-year limit of allotments in [BDN], new allotments are posted to the most recent month in the record, which increases the allotment amount.  The following month the allotment for the next most recent month is increased.  This continues "backward" through the record for each month an allotment is made.

EXAMPLE:  The 6th year is 1991.  The contributions will appear as follows (the month the contribution is posted appears in parenthesis):  $25(1/91) $25(2/91) $25(3/91) $25(4/91) $25(5/91) $25(6/91) $25(7/91) $25(8/91) $25(9/91) $25(10/91) $50(11/91) $50(12/91).  No retroactive adjustment is appropriate as these are really on-going allotments which should only affect remaining entitlement. In a lump-sum adjustment, however, a retroactive adjustment is appropriate as the "allotment" designation can only be retroactive.

(4)  Amended Award Needed.  When necessary, process an amended award for periods previously paid.

**e.  Bank Access Prohibited.**  When a banking record adjustment is pending, [BDN] will display the message ACCESS PROHIBITED - GENERATED AMENDED AWARD PENDING when a benefit award is attempted.  This is only a temporary bar to processing an award.  This bar should clear after the next Benefit Daily cycle following the banking update run but no later than 2 weeks.  Attempt to process the award daily until the bar clears.  If the bar does not clear within 2 weeks, contact the Education Service, Systems staff, [Exchange mail box "[VAVBAWAS/CO/224A](mailto:VAVBAWAS/CO/224A?subject=Part%206%3A%20Chapter%204%20-%20Award%20Processing%20and%20Other%20Authorization%20Issues)" or by calling (202) 273-7169)] for problem cases at VA Central Office. 

*NOTE:  Review the entire banking record and master record before processing an award as some change in the banking record caused the generated award to be produced.  That change could affect further processing.*

**f.  Change in Bank Dates (M26 and M28)**

(1)  If an NOE message code 2950 (see ch. 5) is received due to a "kicker" being received in the banking record after the RAD (released from active duty) date, the "kicker" date on the M28, CH32 Contribution and Misc Data, screen must be changed.  To change the effective date of a "kicker," as shown on the M28 screen, amend the 310 screen as follows:

(i)  Enter an N (no) under RETAIN for the current service dates shown and repeat the service dates or enter corrected service dates.

(ii)  Enter a [BDN] award using the 312 screen which repeats the last award line of the master record.  In the chapter 32 system, the 310 screen cannot be changed unless it is immediately followed by an award action.  This award will not change the monthly rate to include the "kicker," but will correct the effective date of the "kicker" on the M28 screen to the month preceding the RAD date.  When the "kicker" date has been adjusted, process a second amended award to retroactively adjust the monthly rate(s) to include the kicker.

(2)  When processing an award, if the message CONTRIBUTIONS OUTSIDE SERVICE DATES is displayed, review the service dates on the M26 screen.  Follow the instructions in [subparagraph i](#403i) below.

(3)  If a veteran returns to active duty, [contact the Hines PPU (Payment Processing Unit) at "[VAVBAHINES/FIN/RECRT](mailto:VAVBAHIN/FIN/RCRT?subject=Change%20the%20RAD%20date%20per%20Part%206%3A%20Chapter%204)" (see [par. 4.15](#415)) on Exchange] electronic mail to change the RAD date.  After PPU changes this date, access the 310 screen and follow the same procedure described above.

**g.  Allotment Received After Entitlement Exhaust Date**

(1)  If NOE message code 2952, ACTION - ALLOTMENT REC'D AMENDED AWD REQUIRED, (see ch. 5) is received, but the last ending reason in the master record did not change from 65 to 61, award action will be necessary.

*NOTE:  The reason for and amounts of the contribution must be thoroughly reviewed for possible additional actions.  The claimant may have reentered active duty or the service department may have sent additional contributions and/or kicker amounts.*

(i)  If the master record has terminated due to exhausted entitlement, process a stop action, using reason code 61, effective the day before the reason 65 NONE date shown on the M21 Education Master Record Status screen.  Suppress the [BDN] generated letter.  When the master record termination reason has been changed to reason 61, process an amended award to pay benefits to the end of the certified period of enrollment.

*NOTE:  If any new allotments are received after the reason code 65 award has ended, [BDN] automatically issues a check (in error) for the amount of the contributions and the $2-for-$1 amount.  If this happens, call the Education Program Systems staff, [Exchange mail box "*[*VAVBAWAS/CO/224A*](mailto:VAVBAWAS/CO/224A?subject=Part%206%3A%20Chapter%204%20-%20Allotment%20Issue)*" or by calling (202) 273-7169)] for problem cases.  Do NOT stop the award using reason code 61 unless so advised by the Systems staff.*

(ii)  If the master record termination reason 65 date is still in the future, process an amended award effective the first of the current month and terminating at the end of the current certified period of enrollment.

(2)  If notice is received of additional allotments scheduled to be received after an entitlement exhaust date but the banking record has not yet been updated, process a stop action, using reason code 61, effective the date before the NONE date shown on the M21 screen.  Suppress the [BDN] generated letter.  Diary for the date the contribution information is expected to update.  Contact the appropriate service department per paragraph 3.07 for the date to expect the contributions if this date is not known.

**h.  Allotments Outside Service Period.**  If the claimant has any allotments which are not within the service period, [BDN] shows "ALLOTMENT NOT IN SVC PRD: (YR-MO)."  See paragraph 2.05c for a complete description of this informational message.  Take the following steps:

(1)  Verify service periods.

(2)  If service dates are not correct, process as in [subparagraph f](#403f) above.

(3)  If service periods are correct, review the Contributions Account to determine all allotments which are not in the claimant's service period(s).

(4)  [ ]  Contact the service department contact point (see par. 3.07.) to verify whether or not the veteran is entitled to those allotments posted outside the service dates.   He or she should give the contact point the exact service dates and the specific allotments falling outside the service period(s).

(5)  [ ]  Contact the PPU at Hines and advise them of the case.  Establish a short-term diary to control the case.  If the claimant is entitled, the PPU will move the allotments to date(s) within the service dates.  If the claimant is not entitled, PPU will remove the allotments from the claimant's banking record.  PPU will advise the [RPO] when to expect the correction (or will tell him or her when the correction has been made.)  The [RPO] should advise the claimant of the delay in processing the claim and the reason(s) for the delay.

(6)  [ ] Notify the claimant and process any necessary award actions routinely after PPU advises that they have adjusted the account.  Consider special payment procedures in these cases.  (See pt. IV, par. 10.18.)

*NOTE:  Frequently messages occur when a veteran has more than one period of active duty.  See paragraph 3.06 for the proper procedure.*

**i.  Proposed DOD Contributions.**  When a chapter 32 claim is reviewed, carefully check the M28 screen to determine whether the participant has a proposed DOD contribution. 

*NOTE:  The kicker effective date may never be later than the next to the last month of service.  For example, if the RAD is 7/20/92, the kicker effective date should be 6/92 (or earlier).  If the operator needs to change the effective date of the kicker (usually after the RAD), the operator should establish service dates on the 310 screen followed by appropriate award action.  In this example, the RAD would be entered as 7/20/92.  This will change the kicker effective date to 6/92, but the award will pay the kicker based on the previous kicker effective date.  The adjudicator or education clerk will have to prepare a second award effective 6/92 or earlier to pay the retroactive kicker.  When the effective date of the kicker is in doubt based on the information on the M27 and M28 screens, the [RPO] should contact the System staff at* [Exchange mail box "[VAVBAWAS/CO/224A](mailto:VAVBAWAS/CO/224A?subject=Part%206%3A%20Chapter%204%20-%20Kicker%20Issues)" or by calling (202) 273-7169)]*.*

**j.  Reduction or Termination of Contributions.**  If the claimant reduces or terminates the contributions (other than stopping after making the maximum number of months or amounts of contributions), afford him or her due process according to the Computer Matching Act.  (See pt. IV, par. 13.14.)

**4.04  SECTION 903 PROCESSING PROBLEMS**

---

In the past, the Army and the Navy have experienced problems in transmitting section 903 eligibility and entitlement data to the banking activity.  Use the procedures shown below for Army and Navy section 903 cases.  [Refer any problems to the RPO education coordinator or education coordination team.  (See [par. 4.15.)](#415)]

**a.  BDN Shows No Eligibility.**  If supporting evidence indicates a claimant has eligibility to section 903 benefits, but there is no M26 screen or the M26 screen shows either ELIGIBILITY NOT ESTABLISHED or ELIGIBILITY TERMINATED, contact the appropriate service department contact point shown in paragraph 3.07.  If the claimant is eligible, the Army or Navy will provide a letter of eligibility to the appropriate RPO when these individuals are identified.  The service department contact point will also be able to correct their computer record.  (However, Navy has ongoing problems and may not be able to correct the computer record.)

**b.  Letter of Eligibility Received.**  When the letter is received at the [RPO], prepare an out-of-system award on VA Form 22-1997, Education Award, as described in part IV, paragraph 12.11.  Send the award to the [RPO] Finance activity (not PPU in Hines).  Finance will process an 06G special payment.  If a banking record has not been established, [the RPO] Finance will process an out-of-system special payment.  It will take approximately 60 to 90 days for the Army or Navy to correct or establish the banking record.  Finance should establish a local diary to continue regular monthly payments on or about the date of Big Pay each month.  Finance will check the banking record before each out-of-system payment in order to verify that the banking record has not yet been corrected or established.  [The RPO education coordinator, coordination team,] or the Finance activity should keep a list of cases where out-of-system special payment has been made.  VACO or PPU will contact the [RPOs] for the list, to correct the computer records.

NOTE:  In such cases, the adjudicator must manually keep track of the dollar and months of entitlement used to be sure payments are not made in excess of entitlement.

**c.  Finance Actions on Any Out-of-System Payment.**  Once the banking record is established, Finance will enter an 04G fiscal transaction to ensure that any out-of-system special payments are properly reflected as an A/R and notify Adjudication to process an award in BDN to clear the A/R and release additional future payments.

**4.05  AWARDS INVOLVING DROPPED PRIOR [BDN] AWARD LINES**

---

See part IV, paragraph 13.19.

**SUBCHAPTER III.  OUT-OF-SYSTEM PROCESSING ISSUES**

**4.06  TYPES OF ACTIONS REQUIRING OUT-OF-SYSTEM PROCESSING**

---

Most chapter 32 awards can be processed using BDN.  However, the following types of chapter 32 awards are NOT to be entered on BDN and must be processed out-of-system:

**a.** Correspondence awards.  (In December 1992, PPU began paying new correspondence awards using the same procedures as Buffalo RPO Finance activity described in [par. 4.13](#413) below.)

**b.** Flight awards.

**c.** High school or elementary school training awards (where the claimant has elected payment of tuition and fees).

**d.** Apprenticeship and OJT awards.

**e**.  Supplemental awards in cases where the claimant has previously been paid by the PPU and the record has not been moved into the BDN system.  [Generally, these cases were paid by PPU.  Before a RO (Regional Office) processes a refund of contributions, the RO must coordinate with PPU.  See [paragraph 4.16](#416) for adjustment actions if the veteran has an eight‑digit file number.]  These claims can be identified by certain BDN messages which are described below: 

(1)  If a chapter 32 MINQ (Master Record Inquiry) is done, and a benefit record did not convert to BDN, then the M21-M24 screens will not be accessible.  The M26-M29 screens will be accessible, and if benefits have been paid through the Hines PPU, then the following message will be displayed at the bottom of these screens:  "CH32 BENEFITS HAVE BEEN PAID." 

(2)  If BDN award processing is attempted (under CDAT or CADJ) on a chapter 32 benefit account which did not convert to BDN, the BDN will display the following message:  "VETERAN HAS REC'D INTERIM SYSTEM BENEFITS." 

**f.** Cooperative training awards [ (See [par. 4.10](#410).)]  

**4.07  OUT-OF-SYSTEM CHAPTER 32 DISALLOWANCE PROCESSING**

---

**a.  No Prior Award.**  Use BDN to disallow the claim.  (See [par. 4.02a](#402a).)

**b.** Prior Award, No M21-M24 Screens.  If there was a previous chapter 32 award but no BDN benefit record (M21-M24 screens), then process the disallowance out-of-system.  See part III, chapter 9, subchapter 2. 

**c**.  Denials for No Basic Eligibility.  See [paragraph 4.02d.](#402d)

**d**.  Denials for Reasons Other Than No Basic Eligibility. If denying the claim for reasons other than no basic eligibility (for example, program not approved or claimant already qualified for objective), proceed as in [subparagraphs a and b](#407a) above.  (See par. 7.02 for denials of refund claims in chapter 32 death cases.)

**4.08  OUT-OF-SYSTEM SECTION 903 DISALLOWANCE PROCESSING**

---

If BDN will not issue an appropriate disallowance letter, it is important to fully notify the claimant by dictated letter.  (See ch. 6 for the letter paragraphs.)  The law prohibits a refund of section 903 contributions to a participant since DOD contributed the money and not the participant.  Do not mention a refund in the denial letter.

**a.  Service Department Certification.**  If denying the claim because of a negative service department certification, the disallowance letter will point this out.  The letter will tell the claimant to contact the service department if he or she questions the reason for disallowance.  The letter will include  VA appellate rights detailed in part III, chapter 9.

**b.  Reasons Other Than Service Department Certification.**  If denying the claim for any other reason(s), provide the claimant with a full explanation of the denial and furnish VA appellate rights.

**4.09  FUNCTIONS PERFORMED BY PPU AND BUFFALO RO FINANCE**

---

**a.  Payment Functions.**  PPU and the Buffalo Finance division perform the following functions for out-of-system chapter 32 and section 903 awards (see [par. 4.06](#406) for types of awards processed out-of-system):

(1)  Compute monthly rates.

(2)  Compute benefit payment amounts.

(3)  Issue payment vouchers to Treasury in order to release checks.

(4)  Calculate A/R.

(5)  Maintain all payment and A/R records.

(6)  Release award letters, overpayment notices, delinquent certification letters, etc.

(7)  Release certification letters and CODs (Certifications of Delivery).

(8)  Process certification data received from ROs.

**b.** PPU Address.  Out-of-system awards, except for those paid in Buffalo (see [par. 4.12](#412) below), should be sent to the PPU at:

Department of Veterans Affairs (201/35B/PPU)

Data Processing Center

Lock Box 66303

AMF O'Hare, IL 60666

Use the transmittal system outlined in paragraph [4.12d](#412d) below.

**c.** Procedures.  See part IV, paragraphs 12.10 and 12.11, for specific entries on award forms.

**4.10  COOPERATIVE TRAINING**

---

Cooperative training was effective for chapter 32 trainees January 1, 1989.  See part III, paragraph 7.04c, for general instructions on cooperative training. 

**a.** Cooperative [Training Payments Before October 9, 1996.  For awards with an effective date before October 9, 1996,  the cooperative monthly rate was 80% of the full-time rate otherwise payable and the entitlement charge was 80% of the customary rate.  The Buffalo RPO processed these cooperative rate payments using a personal computer program.

**b.  Cooperative Training Payments On or After October 9, 1996.**  For awards with an effective date on or after October 9, 1996, the monthly rate is 100% of the institutional rate for full-time training.  The entitlement charge is 100% of the customary rate.  All RPOs can process these payments on BDN.]

**4.11  REDUCTION OF BENEFITS FOR INCARCERATED VETERANS**

---

See part IV, paragraph 13.13, for instructions on incarcerated veterans.  Because the chapter 32 BDN system does not provide a tuition and fees rate, payments will be made out-of-system by the PPU.  Prepare awards at the reduced rate per the out-of-system payment procedures.

**4.12  FLIGHT, [ ] APPRENTICESHIP, AND OJT AWARDS**

---

 *NOTE:  This paragraph gives procedures for the cases which must be referred to Buffalo  (The other cases listed in* [*par. 4.06*](#406) *will be paid by PPU.  See award preparation instructions in pt. IV, chapter 12.)*

**a.** Original Awards.  For original claims, a banking record must exist.  No benefits will be paid unless contributions are shown.  Complete a 310 screen, Chapter 30/32 Eligibility, according to chapter 3.  Make two prints of the screen after GAD (Generate And Display) processing.  File one copy in the claim folder and forward the second copy to the Buffalo Regional Office.

**b.** Benefit Master Record Already Exists**.**  If a BDN benefit master record already exists (M21 through M24 screens), it is not necessary to complete the 310 screen.  Make any changes to eligibility using the CORR (CORRection) command.  Print a copy of the M23, Education Master Record Eligibility and Entitlement Data, screen with the corrected fields to forward to the Buffalo RPO.

**c.** VA Form 22-1992.  Prepare VA Form 22-1992, Authorization for Certificate of Eligibility or Disallowance, to establish the claimant's eligibility and entitlement for apprenticeship and OJT (On Job Training) programs.  Prepare the form according to part IV, chapter 12.

**d.** Original and Supplemental Award Preparation.  Prepare awards on VA Form 22-1997, Education Award, according to part IV, chapter 12, except for changes to award data shown below:

(1)  Change Reason (item 12a):  Enter the applicable reason code on the first award line.  (See pt. II, ch. 9, par. 9.14.)  Enter reason code 77 to indicate a change in apprenticeship and OJT training periods.

(2)  Monthly Rate or Rate per Lesson (item 12d) (Apprenticeship/OJT)  Enter "COMPUT1" for the rate that applies to the first 6-month period of training (less any prior training allowed for the same program).  Enter "COMPUT2" for the rate that applies to the second period of training.  Enter "COMPUT3" for the rate that applies to the third period of training.  Enter "NONE" to reflect a no-rate period or termination.  Because of the complexity of the calculation involved in determining the date entitlement will be exhausted (see [par. 4.19)](#419), the Buffalo Regional Office will check each award and determine if benefits must be terminated earlier because of insufficient entitlement.   If so, that office will adjust the NONE date as appropriate and send a copy of the award letter to the originating Regional Office.

(3)  Effective Date (item 12E):  Enter the correct beginning date based on VA Form 22-1999, Enrollment Certification, or other form.

(i) Apprenticeship/OJT:  Ordinarily, the effective date for the second period of training is 6 months after the beginning date.  Usually, the effective date for the third period of training is 6 months after the effective date for the second period of training.  Credit for prior training in apprenticeship and OJT course advances the effective dates by the same number of months and days of prior training credited.  (See pt. IV, par. 13.17.)

(ii)  Flight:  Do not enter a date before April 1, 1991.

(4)  Entitlement code:  Enter 51, or 55 for in-service flight training.

(5)  Entitlement Charge:  Leave blank.

(6)  Remarks:  Enter the legend "(1st, 2nd, 3rd, etc.) CHANGE OF PROGRAM" if the award involves a change of program.  This will alert Buffalo to notify the claimant of the program change.  If the claimant had prior training under chapter 32 or section 903, enter "PRIOR TRAINING," along with the type of training and number of months and days of training credited.  This will expedite processing at Buffalo.

**e.** Disposition of Authorization Actions

(1)  Forward the original of the authorization action to the Buffalo Regional Office using Optional Form 41, Routing and Transmittal Slip, as the transmittal document.  A supply may be overprinted locally.  The office of the Adjudication Officer in each Regional Office will be the central control point for preparing the form and transmitting the documents to Buffalo.

(i)  Assign transmittal number "001" to the first transmittal submitted.  Subsequent transmittals will carry the next sequential number.

(ii)  Complete Optional Form 41 in duplicate. Indicate the number of each type of document submitted

(iii) Clearly mark the envelope which is used to mail the documents "CH 32/SEC 903 (APPR/OJT) (FLIGHT) [ ] Documents," as applicable.  Mail the documents to Buffalo as follows:

VA Regional Office

P. O. Box 4616

Buffalo, NY  14240-4616

(iv)  Prepare a listing by file number of each type of form to be transmitted.  Retain the duplicate Optional Form 41 and listing in a holding file.  Dispose of them in accordance with RCS VB-1, part I, item no. 13-502.200.

(2)  File the copies of the authorization documents in the claims folder.  Flash the folder "CH 32/SEC 903 APPR/OJT", or "CH 32/SEC 903 FLIGHT" [ ] as applicable.

**4.13  BUFFALO RO PAYMENT PROCESSING INSTRUCTIONS FOR APPRENTICESHIP/OJT, AND FLIGHT AWARDS**

---

 *NOTE:  The following instructions are **FOR THE BUFFALO REGIONAL OFFICE ONLY**.*

**a.  Adjudication Division**

(1)  Review of Incoming Packages.  Review the packages received [ ] to ensure that they include:

(i)  A print of the [BDN] 310 screen establishing the veteran's eligibility if no benefits were previously awarded.

(ii)  VA Form 22-1992.

(iii)  VA Form 22-1997.

(2)  [BDN] Procedures

(i)  Review of [BDN].  Access [BDN] to determine if a banking record  exists.  If any of the documents are missing or incomplete, or the [BDN] banking record does not exist, return the package [ ] with a brief explanation.

(ii)  No BDN Benefit Record.  It is necessary to have a benefit record ([BDN] M21 screen) established before payments can be made.

A.  Using the CADJ command, establish a pending issue and enter the data [ ] from the 310 screen into the master record.

B.  Prepare an IHL award on the [BDN] 312 screen for one day at the 3/4 time rate.  Set the folder pull indicator to "Y" (CLAIM MUST BE PROCESSED WITH FOLDER).

C.  Since the award will require two signatures, the authorizer should access the claim using the CAUT (Claims Authorization) command and complete the 501 screen, suppressing the computer-generated award letter.

(iii)  Benefit Record Already Exists.  If a chapter 32 benefit record exists, no award action should be necessary.  Review the package and the corresponding benefit record to ensure that all entries are correct.

(iv)  Referral.  Refer the case to Finance for further action.

**b.  Finance Activity.**  The Finance activity will compute the monthly rate for each award line; prepare award, delinquent certification, and termination letters; send the appropriate letter to the trainee with a copy for the RO of jurisdiction for filing in the claims folder, and issue and process certifications of attendance.  See paragraph 6.14 for suggested text for apprenticeship or OJT letters, and, if necessary, consult with Adjudication regarding paragraph selections.  Buffalo Finance uses [BDN] fiscal processing transaction 06A1 which releases payment and debits entitlement as payments are made.  These payments appear in the REASON field of the BDN M29 screen as "OTPMT06", and show participant portion, VA portion, total disbursement, and months of entitlement used.

 **4.14  OTHER AWARD CONSIDERATIONS FOR OUT-OF-SYSTEM CASES**

---

**a.  Expedited Payments.**  Expedite payments through the procedures outlined in part IV, paragraph 10.07, when necessary.

**b.  Folder Flash**

(1)  All Out-of-System Awards.  Flash the claims folder to indicate that a chapter 32 award is paid out-of-system.  Use OF 41, Routing and Transmittal Slip, for this purpose.

(2)  Apprenticeship/OJT, and Flight Awards.  For original awards, the Buffalo RPO will set folder pull indicator "Y" (CLAIM MUST BE PROCESSED WITH FOLDER) during their processing of the stub month payment.  For supplemental awards, the RPO processing the claim will set folder pull indicator "Y" (CLAIM MUST BE PROCESSED WITH FOLDER), using the CORR command.

**c.  Review of Proposed DOD Contribution and Claimant Contribution for Apprenticeship/OJT, and Flight Awards.**  For all apprenticeship and OJT, and [ ] flight awards, review the BDN M26 screen for proposed DOD contributions and to be sure that the veteran's contributions fall within his or her qualifying period of active duty.

(1)  If proposed DOD contributions are involved and a benefit payment record (M21-M24 screens) exists, prepare an amended award repeating the existing award lines effective the earliest date to which the DOD contributions can be applied.  Only after the award processes and the banking record is updated can the case be forwarded to Buffalo for processing the out-of-system award.

(2)  If the veteran's contributions do not fall within his or her qualifying period of active duty, see [paragraph 4.03h](#403h).  Only after the banking record is updated can the case be forwarded to Buffalo for processing the apprenticeship or OJT award.

**d.** Apprenticeship/OJT and Flight Change of Name and Address.  Use existing BDN procedures to enter a change to the claimant's name or address.  Advise PPU of address changes on all other out‑of‑system cases.

**e.** Changes of File Number.  Report all changes of file number to the appropriate payment activity (PPU or Buffalo RPO).

**SUBCHAPTER IV.  OTHER AWARD PROCESSING ISSUES**

**4.15  [EDUCATION] COORDINATORS**

---

**a.** [General.]  The AO (Adjudication Officer) in each RO should appoint an RO education coordinator and an alternate.  The AO should appoint individuals familiar with chapter 32.  The RO coordinator will coordinate change file numbers, refunds, and death benefit claims with the appropriate military retired pay centers, RPOs, other stations, and Central Office when necessary.  If a station changes coordinator or has a new telephone number for the current coordinator, send this information to [Exchange mail box "[VAVBAWAS/CO/224B](mailto:VAVBAWAS/CO/224B?subject=Part%206%3A%20Chapter%204%20-%20Award%20Processing%20and%20Other%20Authorization%20Issues)" or by calling (202) 273-7181).  This staff will forward this information on to the RPO having jurisdiction over that RO].  If not previously done, stations should place the education coordinators on the national E-mail directory to ensure proper coordination of actions.  [ ]

[**b.** RPO Coordination.  The AO in each RPO should take one of the following actions:

(1)  Appoint an RPO education coordinator and an alternate.  The AO should appoint individuals who are familiar with chapter 32 claim processing.  The RPO education coordinator will have the duties of an RO coordinator as shown in [subparagraph a](#415a), but will also coordinate as necessary with PPU, RPC (Records Processing Center), other stations, and Central Office when necessary.

(2)  Appoint an education coordination team.  The duties of the team will be the same as shown above in [subparagraph (a).](#415a)  The team, rather than individuals, will resolve chapter 32 problems.]

**4.16  CLAIMS INVOLVING AN EIGHT-DIGIT FILE NUMBER**

---

 **a.  General** 

(1)  Chapter 32 claim processing requires using the veteran's social security number as the file number in order to access the contributions made during active duty.  Additionally, chapter 32 claims currently use EDU (Education) folders, as opposed to claims folders.  EDU folders can be located at a different station than the claims folder.  Before an RPO can process an original chapter 32 claim having an eight-digit file number, Education Service in Central Office must change the BIRLS (Beneficiary Identification and Records Locator Subsystem) record to the nine-digit social security number.  (See [subpar. b](#416b) for RPO procedures to request a change in the file number to the nine-digit social security number.)

(2)  Central Office will notify an RO one week in advance of changing the veteran's file number in BIRLS.  An RO must renumber each folder which used the old eight-digit file number to reflect the new file number or rejacket the material in a new folder with the new file number.  Folders to be renumbered include claims folders, education folders, CER (Counseling Evaluation/Rehabilitation) folders, and DEA (Dependents' Educational Assistance) folders.

*NOTE:  ROs can process refunds of contributions using an eight-digit file number.  Do not request a change to the file number simply to refund contributions.*

**b.** Necessary [RPO] Actions.  If an RPO receives an original chapter 32 claim which has an eight-digit claim number, the [RPO education coordinator or coordination team] should take the following actions:

(1)  Determine if the veteran is eligible to receive chapter 32 benefits.  (If the veteran is not eligible for chapter 32 benefits, deny the claim out-of-system using the eight-digit file number.)

(2)  If the veteran is eligible to receive chapter 32 benefits, review the BIRLS VID (Veteran Identification) and LOC (Location) screens. 

(i)  On the VID screen, review the social security number field.  If this field is blank, enter the veteran's social security number using the BUPD (BIRLS Update) command.  Review the service information and if service is verified, place a "Y" next to the "Verified" indicator at the bottom right hand side of the VID screen. 

*NOTE:  Only adjudicators having CADJ (Claims Adjudication) authority can update the "Verified" indicator.  BIRLS will not retain the updated indicator if the individual does not have CADJ authority.*

(ii)  On the LOC screen, determine which folders exist (claims folder, EDU folder, CER folder, etc.) and identify the RO having jurisdiction over each folder.  If the LOC screen shows that a claims folder exists, take the actions specified in [subparagraphs (c)](#416c) and ([d](#416d)).

(iii)  If the claims folder is located at the RPC, recall the claims folder.  After Education Service changes the file number, change the file number on the claims folder. 

(iv)  Use the MINQ (Master Record Inquiry) command to determine if the veteran has a running compensation award.  If the veteran has a running compensation award, determine if the veteran has received or is receiving military retired pay (special law 06).

(3)  Send the following information [to the Education Service (Procedures Staff)]:

(i)  Date of original claim.

(ii)  Veteran's name.

(iii)  Eight-digit file number.

(iv)  Nine-digit social security number.

(v)  Folder type and current location (from the LOC screen).

(vi)  Whether or not the veteran is receiving military retired pay (special law 06).

(4)  Diary the claim for 3 weeks.

**c.** Central Office Actions.  When an RPO notifies the Education Service that a file number must be changed from an eight-digit claim number to a nine-digit social security number in order to process an original chapter 32 claim, the Education Service will take the following actions:

(1)  Notify the Adjudication Officer and the [RO education coordinator with jurisdiction over the veteran's claims folder] via E-mail that the file number will be changed from the eight-digit claim number to the nine-digit social security number in one week (specifying the date) and request that any claims or DEA folders affected by this change be renumbered accordingly.

*NOTE:  If the veteran is receiving compensation benefits in lieu of military retired pay, the notice [by the Education Service will also inform the* RO] *Adjudication Officer of the necessity to notify the veteran.  Compensation and Pension programming at Hines Benefit Delivery Center automatically notifies the military retired pay center that compensation benefits are terminated when the file number is changed.  This can result in reinstatement of military retired pay even though the only change is termination of compensation under the claim number and starting of compensation under the social security number.  The [RO] Adjudication Officer should notify the military retired pay center of the change of the file number and request that retired pay benefits not be reinstated.* [*Figure 4.01*](#f401) *shows a suggested sample notification letter.*

(2)  Notify the RPO [education coordinator or coordination team] that requested the file number change.

(3)  Notify the Vocational Rehabilitation and Counseling Officer via E-mail when a CER folder exists that the file number will be changed in one week (specifying the date) and request the CER folder be renumbered accordingly.

(4)  Change the file number to the social security number in BIRLS on the date specified.  (This BIRLS action will also update and change the file number for the Compensation, Pension, and Vocational Rehabilitation master records.)

**d.  Station Follow-up Actions** 

(1)  In the usual case, Education Service will notify the RPO [education coordinator or education coordination team] that the file number will be changed on a specified date.  The RPO should cancel the three week diary specified in [subparagraph b(4)](#416b4) and establish a short diary for the date specified in the E-mail after receiving this notification.  On that date, check BIRLS.  Process a BINQ (BIRLS Inquiry) using the eight-digit claim number.  The VID screen should show "CANCELLED FILE NUMBER" at the bottom of the screen for the record changed to the social security number.  If the BINQ shows this information on the VID screen, the RPO should process the pending chapter 32 claim.

(2)  If the RPO [education coordinator or education coordination team] does not receive any notification from Education Service and the 3-week diary specified in [subparagraph b(4)](#416b4) matures, the RPO should process a BINQ using the eight‑digit claim number.  If the VID screen shows "CANCELLED FILE NUMBER" at the bottom of the screen for the record, Education Service will have already changed the file number and the [RPO] should process the pending claim.  However, if the BINQ shows the same eight-digit claim number, Education Service has not changed the file number.  In this instance, the RPO [education coordinator or education coordination team should send E-mail to the “[VAVBAWAS/CO/224B](mailto:VAVBAWAS/CO/224B?subject=Part%206%3A%20Chapter%204%20-%20Award%20Processing%20and%20Other%20Authorization%20Issues)” mailbox or call the Education Procedures Staff at (202) 273-7181 to get the status of the conversion of the file number.  Reset the diary accordingly.

Defense and Accounting Service                                                                         IN REPLY REFER TO:  
Cleveland Center                                                                                                               Crockett, Davy  
Directorate of Retired Pay                                                                                              FILE NUMBER:  
ATTN: Code RO                                                                                                             CSS 999-99-9999  
PO Box 99191  
Cleveland OH  46199-1126

Dear Sir:

   Due to recent program changes, we have had to change Mr. Crockett's Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) file number from C XX-XXX-XXX to CSS 999-99-9999.

   The automatic data exchange for retired pay will show that Mr. Crockett's VA benefits have been terminated effective the date that he was last paid under his canceled claim number C XX-XXX-XXX.  Retired pay benefits should not be reinstated because VA benefits are continuing to be paid under CSS 999-99-9999, with no interruption of payments.

   If you have any questions regarding this change, please do not hesitate to contact us.

Adjudication Officer

**Figure 4.01.  Sample Retired Pay Notification Letter**

**4.17  CHANGING SERVICE STATUS OF CLAIMANT**

---

**a.  Change From In-Service to Veteran Status.**  Upon receipt of a notice that a serviceperson has been discharged from active duty, determine his or her eligibility status as a veteran. 

(1)  If eligibility does not exist (for example, character of discharge is a bar), terminate any education benefits authorized for periods after the release from active duty effective the day after the RAD date.  Send a dictated letter as in [paragraph 4.02.](#402)

(2)  If eligibility exists and payment is made in BDN, prepare a BDN award after the banking segment updates.  See chapter 5 for the appropriate NOE message.

(3)  If eligibility exists and benefits are paid out-of-system, prepare OF 41 in duplicate to reflect veteran status.  Forward the original to the PPU at Hines or Buffalo Finance, as appropriate, and file the copy in the folder.  The OF 41 will include a notice of change to veteran status with the following information:

(i)  RAD.

(ii)  Type of claim "Chapter 32 Veteran."

(iii)  Entitlement code "51."

(iv)  Delimiting date.

**b.** Change From Veteran to In-Service Status

(1)  Out-of-System Cases.  Upon receipt of a notice that a veteran has returned to active duty, prepare OF 41 to reflect in-service status.  Forward the original to the PPU and file the copy in the folder.  The OF 41 will include a notice of change to in-service status with the following information:

(i)  Latest EOD and CEOD (Computed Entry On Duty).

(ii)  RAD as "On Duty."

(iii)  Type of claim "Chapter 32 Serviceperson."

(iv)  Entitlement code "55."

(v)  Delimiting date as "On Duty."

(2)  [BDN] Cases.  Change the 310 screen and contact the service department to ask them to submit a change in service dates.  They should only change the RAD and not the EOD as there are often allotments preceding the latest entry on duty.

(3)  Claimant in School While on Active Duty.  If the claimant remains in school after returning to active duty, he or she must complete an application including the required certification by his or her commanding officer and education services officer.

*NOTE:  No adjustment in benefits is necessary due to a change to in-service status, unless the claimant was paid for intervals between terms after his or her status changed.  Any breaks should be shown on an amended award.*

**4.18  DOCUMENTATION FOR ORIGINAL AWARDS OR CERTIFICATES OF ELIGIBILITY**

---

When processing an original chapter 32 or section 903 award or certificate of eligibility, the adjudicator or education clerk should print copies of the [BDN] M26 and M27 screens for filing in the claims folder.  If a chapter 32 banking record does not exist on [BDN] at the time of receipt of the original claim, follow the procedures outlined in paragraph 3.07 regarding service department contacts.

**4.19  ENTITLEMENT COMPUTATIONS**

---

**a.** General.  [BDN] computes the claimant's remaining entitlement in both dollars and months after an award is authorized and includes this data in both the claimant's award letter and the master record.  (See ch. 1 for the principles of charging entitlement for chapter 32.)

(1)  Definition of Chapter 32 Entitlement Used.  For all types of training, the dollar amount of original entitlement is reduced by $1 for each benefit dollar paid.  The months and days of remaining entitlement represent the dollar amount of remaining entitlement divided by the full-time institutional rate.  The M26 screen shows the full-time institutional rate for each participant.

(2)  Effect of Fiscal Transactions.  For awards processed at Buffalo, Finance uses fiscal transactions to make payments.  These fiscal transactions properly charge entitlement in [BDN].

(3)  Finding Entitlement Used in [BDN].  The banking record (M26-M29 screens) show entitlement used in both dollars and months and days.  The M26 screen shows entitlement used as of DLP.  The M21 and M23 screens show entitlement used through the ending date of the award.  The M21 and M23 screens will not show entitlement charged by a finance fiscal transaction, such as an 08E1 or 06A1, but the M26 will show the entitlement used for these transactions.  The M21 and M23 will ONLY update the entitlement used by a fiscal transaction when an award is processed.

*NOTE:  In cases where benefits have actually been paid out-of-system, ALWAYS check the banking record, especially the M29, CH32 BENEFIT HISTORY, screen.  If correspondence training has been paid, contact the Hines PPU at* ["[VAVBAHINES/FIN/FECRT](mailto:VAVBAHIN/FIN/RCRT?subject=Part%206%3A%20Chapter%204%20-%20Award%20Processing%20and%20Other%20Authorization%20Issues)"] *E-mail box to determine entitlement used in correspondence training and ask that PPU update the BDN benefit record.*

**b.** Manual Entitlement Computations.  The computations for the various types of training are as follows: 

(1)  Most Training Types.  To compute entitlement manually for other than apprenticeship and OJT, correspondence, or flight [ ] training, use the tables shown in part IV, paragraph 14.06.

*NOTE:  For entitlement purposes, all months are considered to be 30 days in length.*

(2)  Apprenticeship/OJT.  For apprenticeship and OJT cases, Buffalo Finance updates the BDN banking record each time a payment is made.  If a manual computation of entitlement is necessary, apply the following procedures:

(i)  The first 6 months of training are charged at .75 of the full-time institutional rate.

(ii)  The second 6 months are charged at .55 of the full-time institutional rate.

(iii)  Any training period beyond 12 months is charged at .35 of the full-time institutional rate.

EXAMPLE:  A veteran with 36 months and $14,100 original entitlement is enrolled in a 2-year OJT program.  His full‑time institutional rate is $391.67, according to the M26 screen.  The entitlement in months to be charged for this period is as follows:

                                                    .75 X   6    =     4.50

                                                    .55 X   6    =     3.30

                                                    .35 X12    =     4.20

                                                                            12.00   months

 

The entitlement remaining at the end of this award is 36 - 12.00 or 24 months.  The entitlement in dollars to be charged for this period is as follows:

                                                        $391.67    X      .75     =    $293.75    X     6    =      $1762.50

                                                        $391.67    X      .55     =    $215.42    X     6    =      $1292.52

                                                        $391.67    X      .35     =    $137.08    X    12    =      $1644.96

                                                                                                                                          $4699.98

The entitlement remaining in dollars at the end of this award is $14,100.00-$4699.98 or $9400.02.

NOTE:  To calculate entitlement used for a particular payment, use the procedures in [subparagraph (6)](#419b6).

(3)  Correspondence.  For correspondence courses, PPU calculates entitlement charges in accordance with [subparagraph (6)](#419b6) below.  (See [subpar. a](#419a) above regarding PPU calculations.)

(4)  Flight.  For flight cases, Buffalo Finance updates the [BDN] banking record each time a payment is made.  The [BDN] M26 screen will reflect this.  No manual computation of entitlement should be necessary for these cases.  If manual computation of entitlement is necessary, use the procedures in subparagraph (6).

(5)  Cooperative.  [For cooperative training cases paid outside BDN, the RPO Finance updates the BDN banking record each time a payment is made.  The BDN M26 screen will reflect this.  No manual computation of entitlement should be necessary for these cases.  For awards before October 9, 1996, entitlement was charged at 80% of the charge for full-time institutional training.  For awards on or after October 9, 1996, entitlement is charged at 100% of the charge for full-time institutional training.  Use BDN to process these awards with the full-time institutional rate.  BDN automatically calculates the entitlement charge.  If manual computation of entitlement is necessary for awards before October 9, 1996], use the procedures in subparagraph (6).

(6)  Formula for Charging Entitlement in Correspondence, Flight, Cooperative [ ], and Apprenticeship and Other On-the-Job Training.  Entitlement is charged by dividing the amount payable by VA by the full-time institutional monthly rate and rounding to the fifth decimal place.

EXAMPLE:  VA receives a certification of correspondence training for the period October 1, 1990, through

December 31, 1990.  The amount payable by VA is $647.87.  Assume the monthly rate is $404.00.  Compute the entitlement charge for this training as follows:

$647.87/404 = 1.603638.  This is rounded off to 1.60364 months.

**4.20  ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY TRAINING**

---

Special rules which apply to elementary or secondary training are found in chapter 1.  Also, see part III, paragraph 7.16c.

**a.** Enrollment Certification.  If the claimant is eligible for elementary or secondary training, the claimant may receive tuition and fees with no charge to entitlement or elect full benefits with charge to entitlement.  Review the enrollment certification to see if it gives the tuition and fees for the course.

(1)  If the enrollment certification states the tuition and fees for the course, first notify the claimant that he or she may make an election to receive the regular monthly rate payable under chapter 32.  If he or she does not reply or declines the election, prepare an out-of-system award to pay tuition and fees as a lump-sum payment.

(2)  If the amount of tuition and fees are not included and an election to receive the regular chapter 32 monthly rate has not been made, notify the claimant that an election may be made.  At the same time set up the necessary EPC (End Product Code) and contact the school for these charges.

(3)  If the claimant has made an election to receive the regular chapter 32 monthly rate (tuition and fees are not a factor), prepare the award in BDN to pay the institutional monthly rate.  The computer-generated letter may be released.

**b.** Tuition and Fees - Out-of-System Awards**.**  Prepare the award on VA Form 22-1997 according to part IV, chapter 12.  Enter the prorated monthly rate in Monthly Rate, the amount of tuition and fees in Total Charges, and write "No Entitlement Charge per PL 96-466" in Remarks.  Send the award with the claims folder to the PPU for payment.  Dictate a letter to the claimant including award information and referring to the claimant's choice not to elect regular chapter 32 payments.

**c.** Change from Tuition and Fees to Monthly Rate.  If the claimant elects to receive the monthly rate after being paid tuition and fees out-of-system for the same period, refer the claims folder to the local Regional Office Finance activity with an OF 41 explaining that the claimant is changing from tuition and fees (which was paid by PPU) to the monthly rate.  The Finance activity will establish the amount of tuition and fees paid as an A/R.  Do this before entering the BDN award for the monthly rate.  Suppress the computer-generated letter and prepare a dictated letter explaining that the amount of tuition and fees previously paid must offset by the monthly rate payment.

**4.21  [CHAPTER 32 REFUND PROCEDURES**

---

**a.** General.   All ROs process chapter 32 refund requests (VA Form 4-5281, Application for Refund of Educational Contributions), including refunds in death cases (see ch. 7).  In certain instances, the RO will transfer the refund request to the RPO for further action. 

**b.** Refund Request Received - RO Actions 

(1)  If a RO receives a VA Form 4-5281 from a claimant with no chapter 32 master record, take the following actions: 

(i)  Review for Chapter 30, Category III.  If BDN shows that the veteran is on active duty or discharged after February 3, 1991, take the following actions:

A.  Check BDN to determine if there is a chapter 30 master record or a pending claim for chapter 30.  If so, send the refund request to the RPO. 

B.  If the veteran does not have a chapter 30 master record or a pending claim, have the RO Finance activity process the refund request. 

(ii)  Review for Chapter 30, Category IVA.  If BDN shows that the veteran is on active duty or discharged after October 9, 1996, send the refund request to the RPO. 

*NOTE 1:  The refund request may specifically mention "chapter 30 election," Public Law* [*104-275*](https://www.congress.gov/104/plaws/publ275/PLAW-104publ275.pdf) *or something similar.  RO personnel should also be familiar with circular 22-97-1 and appendix A to that circular.  These procedures pertain to chapter 32 participants still on active duty as of October 9, 1996 who qualify for an election to chapter 30.  Send these refund requests to the RPO.*

*NOTE 2:  In certain instances, PPU has paid chapter 32 benefits.  In these instances, PPU will set a BDN file pull indicator that will prevent ROs from processing refund requests.  If the BDN master record show either the message "CH32 BENEFITS HAVE BEEN PAID" or "VETERAN HAS REC'D INTERIM SYSTEM BENEFITS" at the bottom of the M26-M29 screens, contact PPU before taking any further action on the refund request.  (See* [*par. 4.06e*](#406e)*.)  Ensure that PPU has completed their processing BEFORE refunding any contributions.*

(2)  If a regional office receives a VA Form 4-5281 from a claimant with a running or terminated chapter 32 master record, send the refund request to the RPO.  

*NOTE:  ROs should continue to process refunds shown on the COIN EDU 296 CHAPTER 32 TRANSFER UNCLAIMED FUNDS TO TREASURY list.*

**c.** Refund Request Received by RPO - Chapter 32 Participants**.**  See part V, paragraph 4.18.]

**4.22  CERT ISSUE DATE ZEROED OUT REPORT**

---

The chapter 32 Cert Issue Date Zeroed Out report was developed by the Hines [Benefits Delivery Center] to advise [RPOs] of those cases most recently updated.  The cases involved are those which have been generating NOE advising that a certification was required when everything in the record indicated that certification was current and the master record was terminated.  The report is solely for the [RPO education] coordinator's information and he or she should use it to make sure that cases which have been producing unnecessary NOE have been cleared.