# Sub-Chapter 3. On-the-Job and Apprenticeship Training

**Sub-Chapter 3. On-the-Job and Apprenticeship Training**

On-the-job training (OJT) and apprenticeship training allow Veterans and their dependents to learn a trade or skill while working at a particular job, rather than through traditional classroom training. This type of training is not available to active duty service members or spouses using transferred benefits.   

When studying under this type of program, the individual enters into a training contract for a specific period of time with an employer or trade union. At the end of the training period, he or she will earn a job certification or become ajourneyman. In most cases, the individual will receive a salary while in training. As the individual goes through training and his or her skill level increases, so will the salary.

Chapter 33 GI Bill payments are issued monthly after the VA receives certification from the employer to verify the number of hours worked by the trainee.

**a. Types of Training**

Examples of On-the-job or Apprenticeship training (OJT) include:

* Union Plumber
* Hotel Management
* Firefighter

**b. Benefit Payment Details**

Under the Post-9/11 GI Bill, an individual in an OJT or apprenticeship program is entitled to the following benefits:

* **A Monthly Housing Allowance** based on A Monthly Housing Allowance based on the Department of Defense’s (DoD’s) Basic Allowance for Housing (BAH) rate for the school’s ZIP Code where training takes place (pro-rated based on the individual’s benefit level). Under the Post-9/11 GI Bill, an individual will get the following payment for OJT/apprenticeship training:

* 100% of applicable Monthly Housing Allowance (MHA) during the first 6 months of training.
* 80% of applicable MHA during the second 6 months of training.
* 60% of applicable MHA during the third 6 months of training.
* 40% of applicable MHA during the fourth 6 months of training.
* 20% of applicable MHA during the rest of the training.

* **A Books and Supplies Stipend** paid in a lump sum equivalent to $83 per month (pro-rated based on the individual’s benefit level). If the enrollment spans academic years, the stipend payments will be paid in academic year increments.

 

***Sources***

[PL 111-377](https://www.congress.gov/111/plaws/publ377/PLAW-111publ377.pdf), Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act of 2010, Title II Other Educational Assistance Matters, Section 105. Educational Assistance for Programs of Education Other than Programs of Education Leading to a Degree

Training Slides PL111-377

 

**TOOLS**

Search WEAMS for a participating employer

Last updated: 

Tuesday, October 6, 2015