# Part 9: Chapter 5 - Programs Approved by Other Than State Approving Agencies

**Part 9: Chapter 5 - Programs Approved by Other Than State Approving Agencies**

[**Subchapter 1. Foreign Schools**](#SI)  
[5.01 Programs Offered in Foreign Countries](#501)  
[5.02  Requests for Approval](#502)  
[5.03  Approval Criteria](#501)  
[5.04  Processing Requests for Approval](#504)  
  
[**Subchapter 2. Other Special Approvals**](#SII)  
[5.05  Programs Offered By Agencies of the Federal Government](#505)  
[5.06  Programs Offered by Schools in the Former Canal Zone, Guam, the Federated States of Micronesia, and the Republic of Palau](#506)  
[5.07  Job Training Programs](#507)  
[5.08  Aero Clubs](#508)  
[5.09  Programs Approved by Veteran Readiness and Employment](#509)

**Appendix A**  
[Minimum Information to be Included in Requests from Foreign Institutions of Higher Learning for Approval of Programs for United States Veterans Training under Title 38, U.S.C. Chapters 30, 32, and 35, and Title 10, U.S.C. Chapter 1606](#AA)

**Attachments**

**PA 20-05, Veteran Readiness and Employment (VR&E) Chapter 31 Only Programs of Training or Courses Approval Update**

**Appendix CO, Checklist for Chapter 31 Only**

**Appendix CP, Memorandum for Approval**

**Appendix CQ, Site Visit Report**

**Appendix CR, Request for Facility Code**

 

   
**SUBCHAPTER I.  FOREIGN SCHOOLS**

**5.01  PROGRAMS OFFERED IN FOREIGN COUNTRIES**

---

**a.  Approval Authority.**  The Director, Education Service, is responsible for approving programs of education pursued by VA beneficiaries under chapters 30, 32, 35, and 1606 at IHLs (Institutions of Higher Learning) outside the United States.  ([38 CFR 21.4250(c)(2)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14250))  The Director, Manila RO (Regional Office), is responsible for approving programs offered by IHLs and NCDs (Noncollege Degree) schools in the Republic of the Philippines (hereinafter referred to as the Philippines).  ([38 CFR 21.4150(d)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14150))  SAAs (State Approving Agencies) are responsible for approving college-level programs (associate degree or higher) offered by foreign branches or extensions of U.S. colleges and universities.

**b.  Requirements of the Law.** The law provides that VA beneficiaries may not pursue programs of education at schools that are not in a state, unless they are pursuing approved programs leading to standard college degrees or their equivalent at approved IHLs, with one exception.  Persons eligible for chapter 35 may receive VA benefits while pursuing approved NCD programs in the Philippines.

**c.  Denial or Discontinuance.** VA may deny or discontinue educational assistance allowance to VA students in foreign schools if VA finds that such enrollments are not in the best interest of the VA beneficiaries or the government.  The Director, Education Service must approve the action.  If ELRs (Education Liaison Representatives) receive information from the Department of State or some other reliable sources indicating that VA should deny or discontinue benefits, they should send the information along with their recommendations to the Education Service.

**d.  Definition.**  The term "institution of higher learning" means a college or university offering courses of instruction leading to an associate degree or higher, or their equivalent.  The programs must be recognized as being comparable to degrees granted by accredited U.S. colleges and universities.  VA will accept degrees granted by public colleges and universities in foreign countries as being comparable to degrees granted by accredited U.S. colleges and universities.  Degrees or their equivalent granted by private colleges and universities in foreign countries must be comparable to degrees granted by public colleges and universities in the same country.  Degree or equivalent programs must have the same entrance requirements as the degree programs offered by public colleges and universities in the same country.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**5.02 REQUESTS FOR APPROVAL**

---

**a.  Application.**  Foreign colleges and universities with VA students may request approval of their programs by sending written requests to the nearest U.S. Foreign Service post.  Officials authorized to commit the schools to agreements with VA must sign the requests.  The request should include two copies of the school's catalog and calendar containing current information concerning the course or program of education for which the school desires approval.  Schools in the Philippines must submit the information included in [Appendix A](#AA) to the Director, Manila RO.  This information is contained in the Department of State in Foreign Affairs Manual, volume 7, section 210.5.

**b.  Verification.**  U.S. Foreign Service officials will verify the titles or positions and signatures of the certifying officials and forward the school’s requests for approval, other than those in the Philippines, through diplomatic channels to the Education Service.  The Department of State will include in the transmittals any available information pertinent to the school's request for approval.  If schools submit requests in languages other than English, schools should furnish translations to prevent delays in final consideration.

**c.  Previously Approved Schools.**  Foreign colleges and universities, other than those in the Philippines, that have one or more approved programs, may request approval of additional programs by writing directly to the Director, Education Service (225A), 810 Vermont Ave., NW, Washington, DC. 20420.  The requests should specifically identify the programs that the schools desire to have approved.  Two copies of the school's catalog, certified by an authorized official of the school to be true and correct in content and policy, should accompany the requests.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**5.03  APPROVAL CRITERIA**

---

**a  Approval requirements.** VA will not consider programs for approval unless the schools meet the following requirements:

(1)  Approval under 38 U.S.C. is requested in writing by the colleges or universities concerned.

(2)  The U.S. Foreign Service post does not report any adverse information about the colleges or universities (for foreign schools other than those in the Philippines).

**b.  Conditions for Approval.** IHLs must agree to:

(1)  Obtain and  maintain written records of the previous education and training of the VA students, give appropriate credit for the previous education or training with the training periods shortened proportionately, and notify VA students and VA of the credit granted;

(2)  Maintain adequate records to show the scholastic progress of VA students and inform VA promptly when a student's attendance, conduct, or progress does not meet the regularly prescribed standards and practices of the school, and the reason(s) why not;

(3)  Promptly report enrollments, changes in hours of credit or attendance, and interruptions or terminations of training for all VA students.  VA will furnish forms for providing the certifications;

(4)  Agree not to include on enrollment certifications any course(s) that are audited, and inform VA if a VA student receives grade(s) for any course(s) that will not be used when computing graduation requirements;

(5)  Upon request by VA representatives, make available for examination all appropriate records and accounts pertaining to the enrollment of VA students; and

(6)  Accept VA beneficiaries as students at the student's expense, according to the provisions of the law and at rates for tuition and related instructional fees and expenses not greater than those required other students similarly circumstanced.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**5.04  PROCESSING REQUESTS FOR APPROVAL**

---

**a.  Notification.**  Upon determining that a school has complied with all the approval requirements of the requested program(s) or course(s), the Director, Education Service will notify the school by letter with the following specific information:

(1)  Effective date of approval for each program.

(2)  Basis for and condition of approval, referring specifically to the school's catalog, calendar, or bulletin.

(3)  Identification of each program approved.

**b.  Reserved**

**c.  Additional Information.** Requests for information concerning approval status of foreign schools will be referred to the Federal & State Approvals Team (F&SA).

**d.  Notice of Disapproval.** When the Education Service denies a school's request for approval of a course or program of education, the Education Service will promptly notify the school by letter, via email, explaining the basis for the denial.  A copy of the letter will be sent to the claimant and the Buffalo RPO if appropriate.  The notice of disapproval will notify the school that they may request a further review by submitting additional material in support of their request.

**e.  Withdrawal of Approval**

(1)  The Director, Education Service, or Director, Manila RO will withdraw the approval of a course or program of education if there is reason to believe that such course fails to meet any of the requirements of the law or that the school has violated any provisions of the law.

(2)  When the Director, Education Service withdraws programs offered in foreign schools, the schools and all VA students enrolled will be fully informed in writing of the actions, with copies sent to the U.S. Foreign Service post.  The Manila RO will send notices of withdrawal of approval for programs offered in the Philippines.

**f.  Maintaining Approval Information**

(1)  The Manila RO will assign facility codes, maintain WEAMS (Web Enabled Approval Management System) records, and maintain Salesforce approval folders for schools in the Philippines.

(2)  For foreign schools other than those in the Philippines, the Education Service will assign facility codes, maintain WEAMS records, and maintain approval folders containing:

(i)  Copies of the school's request for approval.

(ii)  Copies of any related correspondence.

(iii)  Copies of the notice of approval, disapproval, cancellation, or other notices affecting approval status.

(iv)  22-1998, WEAMS Report, Approval Information.

(3)  The Education Service will add newly approved foreign schools to WEAMS.  In addition, the Education Service will update the WEAMS records when current programs are amended or additional programs are approved, or the approval is withdrawn.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**SUBCHAPTER II.  OTHER SPECIAL APPROVALS**

**5.05  PROGRAMS OFFERED BY AGENCIES OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT**

---

**a.  Approval Authority.**  The Director, Education Service is responsible for the approval of programs of education offered by agencies of the Federal Government authorized under other laws to offer the programs.  ([38 CFR 21.4250(c)(2)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14250).) 

**b.  VACO Federal & State Approvals Team Activity.**  The assigned Federal & State Approvals ELR (SAA-ELR) will maintain WEAMS and approval files; contact the agencies, obtain any course material that may be needed, inform the requesting officials of the procedures for enrolling and certifying VA beneficiaries, and furnish any guidance and assistance that may be needed.

**c**.   **ELR Activities.**  ELR assigned to the state of the requesting federal approval will assign facility code upon the request of Education Service.

**d.  VA Medical Centers.**

(1)  Courses offered by VA medical centers may be approved under [38 CFR 21.4250(c)(2)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14250) if the programs are accredited and authorized by:

(i)  The Council on Medical Education of the American Medical Association;

(ii)  The Council on Dental Education of the American Dental Association; or

(iii)  A nationally recognized accrediting agency as recognized by the Secretary of Education.

(2)  These include internships, residencies, medical specialty programs, and paraprofessional and support services courses.

(3)  VA beneficiaries pursuing approved programs at VA medical centers may receive educational assistance allowances unless 38 CFR 21.4025 bars payment.

(4)  ELRs will assign facility codes upon request by Education Service; the Federal & State Approvals team will maintain WEAMS and approval folders for VA medical centers in their jurisdictions.  WEAMS will list all the approved internships, residencies, and medical specialty courses offered by the medical centers.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**5.06  PROGRAMS OFFERED BY SCHOOLS IN THE FORMER CANAL ZONE, GUAM, THE FEDERATED STATES OF MICRONESIA, AND THE REPUBLIC OF PALAU**

---

**a.  Approval Authority.** The Director, Education Service is responsible for the approval of programs of education offered by schools in the former Canal Zone, Guam, the Federated States of Micronesia, and the Republic of Palau.  ([38 CFR 21.4250(c)(2)(ii)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14250))

**b.  The Former Canal Zone**

(1)  The Panama Canal Treaty relinquished control of the Canal Zone to the Republic of Panama on April 1, 1982.   Approval authority for programs of education offered by branches of U.S. schools in the former Canal Zone reverted to  SAAs.

(2)  The Education Service will process requests for approval of programs offered by schools in the former Canal Zone.  The Education Service will notify the schools of the approval actions taken.  Copies of notification letters to schools and approval data will be sent to the Buffalo RPO.  The Education Service will establish and maintain WEAMS  records.

**c.  Schools in Guam, the Federated States of Micronesia, and the Republic of Palau.**  The F&SA team is responsible for processing requests for approval of programs offered by schools in Guam, the Federated States of Micronesia, and the Republic of Palau.  The ELR will review the requests for approval.  If the ELR finds any omissions, discrepancies, or inconsistencies requiring clarification, amplification, or amendment, they will request the information from the schools.  The ELR is responsible for assigning facility codes, maintaining WEAMS records, and maintaining approval folders for these schools. 

[Back to Top](##Top)

**5.07  JOB TRAINING PROGRAMS**

---

**a.  Approval Authority.**  The Director, Education Service is the approval authority for:

(1)  Apprenticeships and other OJT (On-the-Job Training) programs offered by agencies of the Federal Government 

**b.  Application for Training in One State.**  Federal agencies desiring approval of apprenticeships or other OJT programs in a state should submit applications to the [FEDERAL.APPROVALS@VA.GOV](mailto:FEDERAL.APPROVALS@VA.GOV) mailbox.  The SAA-ELRs will review the applications for completeness.  If the SAA-ELRs require additional information, they are responsible for obtaining it from the agencies.  When applications are complete, the SAA-ELRs will send them to the  SAA-ELR supervisor.  If the SAA-ELR supervisor agrees with the decision, the request will be sent to the Team Chief of the Federal & State Approvals Team (VACO) with a recommendation for the program’s approval or disapproval.

**c.  Application for Training in More than One State.** Federal agencies desiring approval of apprenticeships or other OJT programs offering training in more than one state should apply directly to the Education Service using the FEDERAL.APPROVALS@VA.GOV mailbox.  Agency officials who inquire at Education Service about approval procedures should be provided with complete information on the requirements. If the SAA-ELRs need additional information, they are responsible for obtaining it from the agencies.  When applications are complete and a determination on approval or disapproval has been made, the SAA-ELRs will inform the SAA-ELR supervisor.  If the SAA-ELR supervisor agrees with the decision, the request will be sent to the Team Chief of the Federal and State Approvals Team, along with a recommendation for the program’s approval or disapproval.

**d.  Interstate Carriers.**  Interstate commerce carriers desiring approval of national apprenticeship programs offered in more than one state should apply directly to  their State Approving Agency.

**e.  Notification.**  The Director, Education Service will notify training establishments by letters of the actions taken on their applications. 

**f.  SAA-ELR Responsibilities.**  The SAA-ELRs will contact the training establishments to assure that there is adequate space, equipment, instructional materials, and instructor personnel to provide satisfactory training.  The SAA-ELRs will inform the establishments that they must furnish all VA trainees with copies of training agreements, including the training programs and wage schedules or copies of the personnel actions (in the case of Federal agencies) assigning the VA trainees to the positions. VA may request these documents prior to approval.  SAA-ELRs will provide certifying officials with the instructions on completing VA Forms 22-1999, Enrollment Certification, and 22-6553d, Monthly Certification of On-the-Job and Apprenticeship Training.

**g.  Records.**  When the SAA-ELRs determine that training establishments can provide satisfactory training,  the ELR of jurisdiction will assign facility codes upon the request of Education Service.  The SAA-ELR will maintain WEAMS records and maintain approval folders.

**h.  VA Acting as the SAA.**  If the SAA declines or is otherwise unable to perform the approval of registered or unregistered apprenticeship programs or OJT establishments, the VACO Federal & State Approval team will perform the duties of the SAA. 

[Back to Top](##Top)

**5.08  AERO CLUBS**

---

**a.  Approval Authority.**  The Director, Education Service is responsible for the approval of vocational flight training courses offered by military aero clubs.

**b.  Definition.** Aero clubs are established, formed, and operated under the authority of service department regulations as nonappropriated sundry fund activities.  They are not proprietary schools.  They are Government instrumentalities with one exception.  Aero clubs established as private associations under Army Regulation 230-1 are not Government instrumentalities.  They are private associations subject to the same criteria as other flight schools.

**c.  SAA Activities.**  SAAs are responsible for the approval of vocational flight courses offered by these private associations.  If SAAs decline to approve vocational flight courses, the ELRs of jurisdiction are responsible for the approvals.  SAAs should make inspection visits and furnish recommendations regarding the approval of such courses, and make supervisory visits.  Such activities are covered by the SAA reimbursement contracts.

**d.  Notification.** The ELR will send requests for approvals or changes to the Director, Education Service, only after the SAA and the ELR have reviewed them.  Upon receipt of notifications of approval from the Director, Education Service, ELRs are responsible for assigning facility codes, maintaining WEAMS records, and maintaining Salesforce approval folders.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**5.09  PROGRAMS APPROVED BY VETERAN READINESS AND EMPLOYMENT**

---

**a.  General.**  Veteran Readiness and Employment (VR&E) counselors may request for the approval of educational institutions and training programs under Chapter 31, Chapter 35 Special Restorative Training (SRT), and Chapter 35 Specialized Vocational Training (SVT). VACO VR&E and EDU Leadership developed standard operating procedures for these approvals. (reference VR&E Procedural Advisory dated 07/27/2020). The update complies with the requirements of the Department of Veterans Affairs Expiring Authorities Act of 2018, Public Law (Pub.L) 115-251 and the Veterans Benefits and Transition Act of 2018, Pub.L. 115-407.  The PA also revises VR&E Service’s policy on considering facilities for Chapter 31 only approval that were previously withdrawn by Education Service.    

**b.  Chapter 31 Checklist for Approval of Chapter 31 only Programs of Training or Courses** 

(1)  VR&E Counselors will complete and submit Appendix CO to the assigned Oversight and Accountability Division staff for adjudication. 

(2)  The VR&E counselor will complete and submit Appendix CP, Memorandum for Approval to the assigned Oversight and Accountability Division staff for adjudication. 

(3)  The VR&E counselor will complete and submit Appendix CQ, CH31 Site visit Report to the assigned Oversight and Accountability Division staff for adjudication.  

(4)  The VR&E Counselor will complete and submit Appendix CR, Request for Assignment of New Facility Code to the assigned Oversight and Accountability Division staff for adjudication. 

**Note:** See attached examples of each required document.

**c.  Chapter 35 Special Restorative Training and Specialized Vocational Training Approvals** 

(1)  Eligible children over age 14 handicapped by physical or mental disabilities which prevent pursuit of programs of education may receive SRT. This may involve speech and voice correction, language retraining, speech (lip) reading, auditory training, Braille reading and writing, and other courses of this nature. 

(a) The VRC, after consulting with the VRP, may authorize the following courses:

* Speech and voice correction or retention
* Language retraining
* Speech (lip) reading
* Auditory training
* Braille reading and writing
* Training in ambulation
* One-handed typing
* Non-dominant handwriting
* Personal, social and work adjustment training
* Remedial Reading
* Courses at special schools for those with physical or mental health disabilities
* Courses provided at facilities which are adapted or modified to meet special needs of students with disabilities

(b) SRT services that can be provided to beneficiaries are limited to the following: 

* Medical or psychiatric treatment
* Services that cannot be provided at a VA facility

(c) Services must not be authorized solely to enable the claimant with a disability to enter and pursue a regular program at a public school.  In accordance with [**38 CFR 21.3303**](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=a8591937d5f414b7027bdbb891217442&mc=true&node=se38.2.21_13303&rgn=div8 "https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?sid=a8591937d5f414b7027bdbb891217442&mc=true&node=se38.2.21_13303&rgn=div8"), training must be pursued on a full-time basis, and may be pursued concurrently with a program of education.

(d)  If the State pays for the (SRT) services, there is not a financial need for SRT.  Prior to approval of SRT, VA must have considered assistance available under provisions of State-Federal programs for individuals with disabilities.

(2)  Eligible spouses and children over age 14 handicapped by physical or mental disabilities which prevent pursuit of programs of education may receive SVT. These are specialized courses, alone or in combination with other courses, leading to vocational objectives which are suitable for the personand required by reason of their physical or mental handicaps. 

(3)  If the facilities and programs which the VR&E staff desires to use for SRT or SVT are not approved, the VR&E staff and the ELRs will follow the procedure outlined above for approving facilities and programs for VR&E. 

[Back to Top](##Top)

**Appendix A**

**MINIMUM INFORMATION TO BE INCLUDED IN REQUESTS FROM FOREIGN INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER LEARNING FOR APPROVAL OF PROGRAMS FOR UNITED STATES VETERANS TRAINING UNDER TITLE 38, U.S.C. CHAPTERS 30, 32, AND 35, AND TITLE 10, U.S.C. CHAPTER 1606**

**1.  Name.** The full legal name of the institution, the local alternative name(s), and the English equivalent, if appropriate.

**2.  Address.** The complete address of the institution.

**3.  Certifying Official(s).**  The full name(s) and title(s) of persons authorized to certify VA forms for the institution.

**4.  Language(s).**  The language or languages used in conducting classes.

**5.  Sponsorship**.  The sponsorship, such as Ministry of Education, province, state, canton, municipality, specific church organization, or religious order.

**6.  Accreditation.**  The accrediting authority, such as Ministry, Department, or Office of Education.

**7.  Classification.**  Is the institution officially classified as an institution of higher learning?

**a.  Foreign Institutions.**  Does the Ministry, Department, or Office of Education, etc., officially classify the institution as an institution of higher learning; i.e., as a college, university, or similar establishment offering post secondary level academic instruction that leads to a degree?  Official documents should be cited.

**b.  "American Plan" Institutions.**  Institutions that closely follow the educational philosophy, curriculum, and teaching methods of United States colleges and universities.  The institutions offer degree programs similar to those offered by colleges and universities in the U.S.  The institutions are organized mainly to meet the educational needs of U.S. citizens.

(1)  Does the host nation's Ministry, Department, or Office of Education, etc., or the host state (or province, canton, etc.) empower the institution to grant degrees?

(2)  Is the institution empowered under a state law in the United States to grant degrees?

(3)  Is the institution offering the degree programs accredited as a collegiate institution by a US regional or national accrediting agency?

(4)  Is the institution a "candidate" for accreditation; or is the institution accredited by a US agency recognized to accredit specialized degree-level programs?

(5)  Official documents should be cited to corroborate the responses to subparagraphs (1), (2), (3), and (4) above.

**8.  Courses(s) or Program(s) of Education.** Names of all courses or programs of study that the institution desires to have approved, with the academic prerequisites for enrollment, and the length.  References to specific courses by name and/or number in catalogs are sufficient if the prerequisites and lengths are in the catalogs.  Include two copies of the current catalog certified as true and correct in content and policy by an authorized official of the institution.

**9.  Tuition and Fees.**  Will the institution agree to accept VA beneficiaries as students, at the student's expense, according to the provisions of the law; and at rates for tuition and related instructional fees and expenses not greater than those required by other similarly circumstanced students?

**10.  Records.** Will the institution agree to maintain sufficient records to show the progress of all VA students and to promptly inform VA when any VA student’s attendance, conduct, or progress is not satisfactory according to the regularly prescribed standards and practices of the institution, and to include the reason(s) therefore?

**11.  Certification.** Will the institution agree to complete the enrollment certifications and promptly inform VA when it comes to their attention that VA students have interrupted or discontinued their courses or programs of study, giving the dates of withdrawal and the reason(s), if known?

**12.  Credit for Prior Training.**  Will the institution give appropriate credit for previous education and training of VA students, shorten training periods proportionately, and enter the credit granted on enrollment certifications?

**13.  Inspection.**  Will the institution, when requested by VA, make all appropriate records pertaining to the enrollment of VA beneficiaries available for examination by VA or its representatives?

**14.  Catalogs/Bulletins.**  Will the institution routinely furnish VA with current publications concerning the courses and programs of study that are approved under the law?

**15.  Signature.**  The application should be dated and subscribed by the office authorized to commit the institution to an agreement with VA, showing his or her title or position.

[Back to Top](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000075682/Part-9-Chapter-5-Programs-Approved-by-Other-Than-State-Approving-Agencies##Top)