# Sub-Chapter 2. Veterans

## Sub-Chapter 2. Veterans

(Updated 10/09/2024)

This section of the Post-9/11 GI Bill (chapter 33) Benefits Manual explains the eligibility criteria required for veterans who want to receive benefits under chapter 33.

Learn more about the following eligibility criteria: 

[2.01 Qualifying Service](#201)

[2.02 Length of Service](#202)

[2.03 Benefit Levels](#203)

[2.04 Period of Eligibility](#204)

[2.05 Excluded Service](#205)

[2.06 Section 106](#2.06 Section 106)

## 2.01 Qualifying Service

---

**a.**Veterans are eligible for Post-9/11 GI Bill Education Benefits if they served a minimum of 90 days on active duty after September 10, 2001, or at least 30 days if discharged for a service-connected disability or sole survivorship. This covers certain types of active duty served as a member of the Uniformed Services or because of a call up or mobilization to active duty from a reserve component (National Guard or Selected Reserve) under certain sections of title 10, title 14, or title 32.

Basic entry-level and skills training does not count towards qualifying service unless the Veteran has completed 730 days (24 months) of service. For more information, see 70/80 rule below.

**Note:** 38 USC § 3301 and 38 CFR § 21.9505 specifically use the term “Armed Forces” when referencing qualifying active duty service, rather than “Uniformed Services”. VA General Counsel has determined the two terms have the same meaning for purposes of VA benefits due to 33 USC 3072(a) and 42 USC 213(d), stating service in the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and Public Health Service, respectively, is considered active military service under laws administered by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs. Therefore, the reference to “Armed Forces” in 38 USC § 3301 should be treated as having the same meaning as “Uniformed Services”.

**b. Veterans**

To qualify for chapter 33 benefits, a Veteran must have served at least 90 aggregate (total) days of active duty service after September 10, 2001, and have an honorable discharge. Three years of total service or a discharge due to a service-connected disability or sole survivorship will qualify a Veteran for 100% of the Post-9/11 GI Bill benefit. Less than 3 years of cumulative service will qualify a Veteran for a lower percentage of benefits.

**c. National Guard/Reserve**

National Guard members and reservists who have served a minimum of 90 days of qualifying service are eligible to receive chapter 33 benefits.

**Note**: Effective October 1, 2011, VA began paying benefits to members of the Army National Guard and Air National Guard based on qualifying service under title 32. Payments may be made retroactively for enrollment(s) at an approved educational institution for attendance on or after August 1, 2009. The following service may be qualifying:

* Full-time service in the National Guard for the purpose of organizing, administering, recruiting, instructing, or training
* Activations in support of a national emergency under Section 502(f)of title 32

If individuals affected by these changes were already using the Post-9/11 GI Bill previously, they will be paid for any additional benefits they would have been entitled to because of a higher benefit level.

In addition to the title 32 service in the previous section, mobilizations under the following titles and sections qualify as active duty service for the purpose of chapter 33:

* **Sections 688, 12301(a), 12301(d),******12301(g), 12301(h), 12302, 12304, 12304a, or 12304b of title 10****
* **Section 3713 of title 14**

**Note 1:**Education Service has been made aware that some states used the old categorization of 672(d) on active duty orders in the early to mid 2000’s. Section 672(d) was renumbered as 12301(d) in 1994. As such, VCEs should recognize active duty service under section672(d) of title 10 as qualifying for the Post-9/11 GI Bill if the service was on or after September 11, 2001.

**Note 2:** Active duty service performed after September 10, 2001, under the authority of title 10, section 12301(h) is creditable service, but may not be applied to the benefit level for terms beginning prior to August 1, 2018.

**Note 3:** Active duty service performed on or after June 30, 2008, under the authority of title 10, sections 12304a and 12304b is creditable service, but may not be applied to the benefit level for terms beginning prior to August 1, 2018.

**Note 4:** Active duty service performed on or after December 31, 2011, under the authority of title 14, section 3713 (formerly section 712) is creditable service.

***Sources***

[**PL 111-377**](https://www.congress.gov/111/plaws/publ377/PLAW-111publ377.pdf), Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act of 2010, Title II Other Educational Assistance Matters, Section 101. Modification of Entitlement to Educational Assistance

[**PL 112-239**](https://www.congress.gov/112/plaws/publ239/PLAW-112publ239.pdf), National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2013, Title VI Compensation and Other Personnel Benefits, Section 681. Equal treatment for members of Coast Guard Reserve called to active duty under title 14, United States Code

[**PL 115-48**](https://www.congress.gov/115/plaws/publ48/PLAW-115publ48.pdf), Harry W. Colmery Veterans Educational Assistance Act of 2017, Title I Post-9/11 Educational Assistance Program, Section 101. Consideration of certain time spent receiving medical care from Secretary of Defense as active duty for purposes of eligibility for Post-9/11 Educational Assistance

[**PL 115-48**](https://www.congress.gov/115/plaws/publ48/PLAW-115publ48.pdf), Harry W. Colmery Veterans Educational Assistance Act of 2017, Title IV Reserve Component Benefits, Section 401. Eligibility of reserve component members for Post-9/11 Educational Assistance

[**PL 117-333**](https://www.congress.gov/117/plaws/publ333/PLAW-117publ333.pdf), Veterans Auto and Education Improvement Act of 2022, Section 10. Eligibility for educational assistance under Department of Veterans Affairs Post-9/11 Educational Assistance Program of certain individuals who receive sole survivorship discharges

[**74 FR 60**](https://www.federalregister.gov/d/E9-7052/p-9), page 14654, Eligibility

Electronic Code of Federal Regulations.[**§ 21.9520 Basic Eligibility**](https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-38/chapter-I/part-21/subpart-P/subject-group-ECFR3a06ef8b51a28f1/section-21.9520)

[Back to Top](#TOP)

## 2.02 Length of Service and Separation Reasons

---

**a.**A Veteran must have a total of 90 days of qualifying active-duty service after September 10, 2001, **AND** any of the following:

* Be honorably discharged from the Uniformed Services
* Be released from the Uniformed Services with service characterized as honorable and placed on the retired list or temporary disability retired list, or transferred to the Fleet Reserve or the Fleet Marine Corps Reserve
* Be released from the Uniformed Services with service characterized as honorable for further service in a reserve component or for further service in the Space Force in a space force active status not on sustained duty under section 20105 of title 10
* Be discharged or released from the Uniformed Services for:
  + A Condition Existing Prior to Service (EPTS)
  + A Hardship (HDSP)
  + Condition Interfering with Duty (CIWD)

**Note**: Effective January 4, 2011, an ‘Honorable’ discharge is required for allqualifying periods of service, except when the separation is for disability or sole survivorship. If the Release from Active Duty was on or before January 3, 2011, and the separation reason was for CIWD, EPTS, or HDSP eligibility is still granted for a general discharge. However, a “Dishonorable” discharge does not grant eligibility regardless of the separation reason.

**OR**

* Served at least 30 continuous days on active-duty after September 10, 2001 and be discharged due to a service-connected disability.
* Disability discharges are valid only on qualifying periods of active duty service for chapter 33. Disability discharges from non-active drilling service do not qualify.
* VA disability percentage ratings do not apply to chapter 33 and are separate and distinct.
* Disabilities existing prior to service are not service-connected and do not qualify.
* Temporary disability discharges are service-connected and qualify.
* There is no character of discharge requirement, outside of the statutory bar to benefits that exists when a service period is characterized as “Dishonorable”.

**OR**

* Served at least 30 continuous days on active duty after September 10, 2001 and be discharged due to sole survivorship.
* A sole survivorship discharge, as defined in 10 U.S.C. § 1174(i), is the early separation of a member of the Armed Forces who is the only surviving child in a family in which the mother or father, or one or more siblings, served in the Armed Forces and, as a result of that service, either died or was severely injured (resulting in permanent disability), or is in a captured or missing in action status. The death, status, or disability must not have been a result of intentional misconduct or willful neglect of the parent or sibling and must not occurred during a period of unauthorized absence.
* Active duty service pursuant to an agreement under section 2107(b) (ROTC), section 7448 (Army Academy), section 8459 (Naval Academy), section 9448 (Air Force Academy) of title 10, or section 1925 (Coast Guard Academy) of title 14 **is not** excluded from length of service calculations for a service period with a discharge reason of sole survivorship.
* An active duty service period counted for purposes of loan repayment under 10 U.S.C chapter 109 **is** excluded from length of service calculations for a service period with a discharge reason of sole survivorship.

* There is no character of discharge requirement, outside of the statutory bar to benefits that exists when a service period is characterized as “Dishonorable”.

**NOTE:**IADT for members of a reserve component is performed based on an order to active duty under 10 USC 12301(d), which meets the definition of "active duty" for the Post-9/11 GI Bill. Keep in mind that IADT encompasses entry level and skill training and, consequently, may be deducted unless the individual is discharged due to a service-connected disability or sole survivorship, accrues at least 30-months of aggregate service, or accrues at least 24-months of aggregate service and meets the requirements of the 70/80% rule.

[Back to Top](#TOP)

### 2.03 Benefit Levels

---

All benefit payments are based on the amount of qualifying active duty service each Veteran has after September 10, 2001. The benefit level chart outlines the percentage of benefits based on qualifying service. It applies to active duty, National Guard, or Selected Reserve members, who have served on active duty for at least 90 days.

Benefit Level Chart

| **Qualifying Post-9/11 Service** | **Number of Days** | **Percentage of Maximum Benefit Payable** |
| --- | --- | --- |
| At least 36 months | If aggregate service *(including* entry training) is 1095 days or more days | 100% |
| At least 30 continuous days on active duty and must be discharged due to service-connected disability or sole survivorship |  | 100% |
| Purple Heart Recipients |  | 100% |
| 30 months  (At least 30 months, but less than 36 months) | If aggregate service *(including* entry training) is from 910 to 1094 days | 90% |
| 24 months  (At least 24 months, but less than 30 months) | If aggregate service *(including* entry training) is from 730 to 909 days | \*80% (asterisk for percentage for initial skills and training) |
| 18 months  (At least 18 months, but less than 24 months) | If aggregate service*(excluding*entry training) is from 545 to 729 days | \*70% (asterisk for percentage for initial skills and training) |
| 6 months  (At least 6 months, but less than 18 months) | If aggregate service *(excluding* entry training) is from 180 to 544 days | 60% |
| 90 days  (At least 90 days, but less than 6 months) | If aggregate service *(excluding* entry training) is from 90 to 179 days | 50% |
| This chart explains how to reach different benefit level of the Post 9/11 GI Bill. | | |
| --- | --- | --- |

\*The 70/80% rule is as follows:

If the aggregate service including training is at least 24 months (730-909 days) but less than 30 months (910-1094 days) AND the aggregate service excluding training is at least 18 months (545 to 729 days) but less than 24 months, the individual will be deemed eligible at the 70% benefit level. See Sub-Chapter 5 Eligibility Excluded Service.

**Note:** Historically, a 40% benefit level existed for individuals with at least 90 days, but less than 6 months of service. The 40% benefit level was eliminated, effective August 1, 2020, and became the 50% benefit level. In a corresponding change, the previous service requirements for 50% benefit level (at least 6 months but less than 12 months) and 60% benefit level (at least 12 months but less than 18 months) were consolidated, with the service requirement for 60% benefit level becoming at least 6 months but less than 18 months. Individuals previously eligible at the 40% benefit level are eligible to receive payment at the 50% benefit level for enrollments beginning on or after August 1, 2020.

***Sources***

[**PL 110-252**](https://www.congress.gov/110/plaws/publ252/PLAW-110publ252.pdf), Chapter 33 Post-9/11 Educational Assistance, Subchapter II-Educational Assistance, Section 3311. Educational assistance for service in the Armed Forces commencing on or after September 11, 2001: entitlement

[**PL 110-252**](https://www.congress.gov/110/plaws/publ252/PLAW-110publ252.pdf), Chapter 33 Post-9/11 Educational Assistance, Subchapter II-Educational Assistance, Section 3312. Educational assistance: duration

[**PL 111-377**](https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/PLAW-111publ377/pdf/PLAW-111publ377.pdf), Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act of 2010, Title II Other Educational Assistance Matters, Section 101. Modification of Entitlement to Educational Assistance

[**PL 115-48**](https://www.congress.gov/115/plaws/publ48/PLAW-115publ48.pdf), Harry W. Colmery Veterans Educational Assistance Act of 2017, Title I Post-9/11 Educational Assistance Program, Section 105. Consolidation of certain eligibility tiers under Post-9/11 Educational Assistance Program of the Department of Veterans Affairs

[**PL 117-333**](https://www.congress.gov/117/plaws/publ333/PLAW-117publ333.pdf), Veterans Auto and Education Improvement Act of 2022, Section 10. Eligibility for educational assistance under Department of Veterans Affairs Post-9/11 Educational Assistance Program of certain individuals who receive sole survivorship discharges

Electronic Code of Federal Regulations. [**§ 21.9520 Basic Eligibilit**](https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-38/chapter-I/part-21/subpart-P/subject-group-ECFR3a06ef8b51a28f1/section-21.9520)[**y**](https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-38/chapter-I/part-21/subpart-P/subject-group-ECFR3a06ef8b51a28f1/section-21.9520)[**Post-9/11 GI Bill Eligibility for Active Duty Veterans**](https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-38/chapter-I/part-21/subpart-P/subject-group-ECFR3a06ef8b51a28f1/section-21.9520)

Electronic Code of Federal Regulations. [**§ 21.9640 Rates of payment of educational assistance**](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=42c86d44d2b6d4e2cbe11db78a865164&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_19640)

 [Back to Top](#TOP)

**2.04 Period of Eligibility**

---

**a.**Veterans who qualify for chapter 33 have up to 15 years to use their education benefits if discharged prior to January 1, 2013. Veterans discharged on or after January 1, 2013, have no time limit to use benefits.

Eligibility for education benefits begins on the date of the last active-duty discharge of either:

* 90 aggregate days; or
* 30 days if released for a service-connected disability or sole survivorship

If an individual established eligibility by using aggregate service, the last period of qualifying service used to meet the minimum service requirement (90 days) will be used to establish the delimiting date. Additionally, a subsequent period of qualifying active duty service of at least 90 continuous days will lead to a new delimiting date.

Example: James was a member of the Air National Guard and mobilized over 19 times under title 10 mobilizations orders. His periods of service ranged from January 1, 2008, through July 2, 2012, all of which were less than 90 days in duration. His eligibility is based on the aggregation of multiple service periods. His delimiting date would be based on the release from active duty (RAD) date of the service period which contains the 90th day of qualifying service.

**b.** Veterans released from active duty prior to January 1, 2013, may be eligible for a delimiting date extension or subject to an alternate delimiting date calculation method due to an upgraded discharge. See Part 3: Chapter 4 - Delimiting Date Extensions for more information.

***Sources***

[**PL 110-252**](https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/USCODE-2011-title38/html/USCODE-2011-title38-partIII-chap33-subchapIII-sec3321.htm), Chapter 33 Post-9/11 Educational Assistance, Subchapter III Administrative Provisions, Section 3321. Time limitation for use of and eligibility for entitlement

[**PL 115-48**](https://gcc02.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.congress.gov%2F115%2Fplaws%2Fpubl48%2FPLAW-115publ48.pdf&data=05%7C01%7C%7C9b914a103a844d6ed4db08dadcffd0de%7Ce95f1b23abaf45ee821db7ab251ab3bf%7C0%7C0%7C638065288534416946%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C3000%7C%7C%7C&sdata=nqG1G5tEkbLimd6jOvcQWlY0VjodVomaOoG13g25xps%3D&reserved=0), Harry W. Colmery Veterans Educational Assistance Act of 2017, Title I Post-9/11 Educational Assistance Program, Section 112. Honoring the national service of members of the Armed Forces by elimination of time limitation for use of entitlement

[**PL 117-333**](https://www.congress.gov/117/plaws/publ333/PLAW-117publ333.pdf), Veterans Auto and Education Improvement Act of 2022, Section 10. Eligibility for educational assistance under Department of Veterans Affairs Post-9/11 Educational Assistance Program of certain individuals who receive sole survivorship discharges

Electronic Code of Federal Regulations. [§ 21.9520 Basic Eligibility](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=42c86d44d2b6d4e2cbe11db78a865164&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_19520)

Electronic Code of Federal Regulations. [§ 21.9530 Eligibility time limit](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=42c86d44d2b6d4e2cbe11db78a865164&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_19530)

 [Back to Top](#TOP)

 **2.05 Excluded Service**

---

**a.**Some periods of active duty service are partially qualifying or non-qualifying for Post-9/11 GI Bill purposes. Examples of such service include:

* A period of title 10 service authorized under a section **other than** 688, 12301(a), 12301(d), 12301(g), 12301(h), 12302, 12304, 12304a, or 12304b
* A period of title 14 service authorized under a section **other than** **section 3713 (formerly section 712)**
* A period of title 32 service **other than**:
  1. Full-time service as an Active Guard Reservist (AGR) for the purposes of organizing, administering, recruiting, instructing, or training the National Guard, or;
  2. Full-time service in the National Guard under section 502(f) of title 32 when authorized by the President or the Secretary of Defense for the purpose of responding to a national emergency declared by the President and supported by Federal funds
* A period of title 42 service authorized under any section
* A period of service of an officer commissioned after completion of a Reserve Officers’ Training Corps (ROTC) course under section 2107(b) of title 10 \*
* A period of service of an officer commissioned after graduation from a military service academy under section 7448, 8459, or 9448 of title 10 \*
* A period of service of an officer commissioned after graduation from the Coast Guard Academy under section 1925 (formerly 182) of title 14 after January 3, 2011 \*
* A period of service terminated due to defective enlistment or induction, based on the individual being a minor, an erroneous enlistment or induction, or a defective enlistment agreement
* A period of service counted for purposes of repayment of an education loan under chapter 109 of title 10
* A period of Selected Reserve service used to establish eligibility under the Montgomery GI Bill – Active Duty (MGIB or chapter 30), Montgomery GI Bill – Selected Reserve (MGIB-SR or chapter 1606), or the Reserve Education Assistance Program (REAP or chapter 1607) \*\*
* A period of service in the Armed Forces, beginning on or after August 1, 2011, which was used to establish eligibility under the Montgomery GI Bill – Active Duty (MGIB or chapter 30), Montgomery GI Bill – Selected Reserve (MGIB-SR or chapter 1606), or the Reserve Education Assistance Program (REAP or chapter 1607) \*\*

\* - These exclusions do not apply to service periods with a discharge reason of sole survivorship.

\*\* - An exception exists for individuals who established eligibility under chapter 1607 using a period of service beginning on or after August 1, 2011, and subsequently lost 1607 eligibility due sunset of the program on November 26, 2019. See section 2.06 for more information about this exception.

Learn more about Excluded Service in Sub-Chapter 5 Eligibility Excluded Service.

***Sources***

[**PL 110-252**](https://www.congress.gov/110/plaws/publ252/PLAW-110publ252.pdf), Chapter 33 Post-9/11 Educational Assistance, Subchapter II-Educational Assistance, Section 3311 Educational assistance for service in the Armed Forces commencing on or after September 11, 2001: entitlement

[**PL 111-377**](https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/PLAW-111publ377/pdf/PLAW-111publ377.pdf), Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act of 2010, Title II Other Educational Assistance Matters, Section 101. Modification of Entitlement to Educational Assistance

[**PL 115-48**](https://gcc02.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.congress.gov%2F115%2Fplaws%2Fpubl48%2FPLAW-115publ48.pdf&data=05%7C01%7C%7C9b914a103a844d6ed4db08dadcffd0de%7Ce95f1b23abaf45ee821db7ab251ab3bf%7C0%7C0%7C638065288534416946%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C3000%7C%7C%7C&sdata=nqG1G5tEkbLimd6jOvcQWlY0VjodVomaOoG13g25xps%3D&reserved=0), Harry W. Colmery Veterans Educational Assistance Act of 2017, Title I Post-9/11 Educational Assistance Program, Section 106. Eligibility for Post-9/11 Educational Assistance for certain members of reserve components of Armed Forces who lost entitlement to educational assistance under Reserve Educational Assistance Program

[**PL 117-333**](https://www.congress.gov/117/plaws/publ333/PLAW-117publ333.pdf), Veterans Auto and Education Improvement Act of 2022, Section 10. Eligibility for educational assistance under Department of Veterans Affairs Post-9/11 Educational Assistance Program of certain individuals who receive sole survivorship discharges.

Electronic Code of Federal Regulations. [§ 21.9505 Definitions – Active Duty](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=98abc072d43c0e4a71a02de57ddf05b5&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_19505)  
 

[Back to top](#TOP)

**2.06 Section 106**

Section 106 of the Harry W. Colmery Veterans Educational Assistance Act of 2017 authorized claimants who previously used service to establish eligibility under the Reserve Educational Assistance Program (REAP or chapter 1607), and who upon enactment of the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) of 2015 did not retain eligibility under REAP, the opportunity to make an election to have such service credited towards establishing educational benefits under the Post-9/11 GI Bill Program. Individuals who made this election received a minimum benefit level of 60% and entitlement equal to the months and days they had remaining under REAP as of November 25, 2015. A Veteran who established or increased eligibility under Section 106 was eligible to receive payments for enrollments beginning on or after August 16, 2017.

***Sources***

[**PL 115-48**](https://www.congress.gov/115/plaws/publ48/PLAW-115publ48.pdf), Harry W. Colmery Veterans Educational Assistance Act of 2017, Title I Post-9/11 Educational Assistance Program, Section 106. Eligibility for Post-9/11 Educational Assistance for certain members of reserve components of Armed Forces who lost entitlement to educational assistance under Reserve Educational Assistance Program