# Sub-Chapter 2. Non-College Degree (NCD) Programs

**Sub-Chapter 2. Non-College Degree (NCD) Programs**

The Post-9/11 GI Bill is available to use for NCD programs. NCD programs produce career-specific diplomas or professional certifications. This training is designed to advance an individual’s skills, especially in relation to a present or future job. NCD programs include training for jobs based on manual or practical activities related to a specific trade, occupation, or vocation.

**Note:** **Prior to October 1, 2011, payment is made at the rate and entitlement charge of the benefit relinquished to establish Post-9/11 GI Bill eligibility**.

**a. Types of Training**

Examples of NCD training include:

* Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning (HVAC)
* Truck Driving
* Emergency Medical Technician (EMT)
* Barber/Beautician School

**b. Benefit Payment Details**

The payment amount for NCD training varies, depending on the type of school or institution that a student attends. The amount paid is based on the number of hours of training attended during each week of the month. 

**c. Training for NCD Programs at an Institution for Higher Learning**

The Post-9/11 GI Bill will pay the following benefits if a student chooses to attend a NCD program at an institution for higher learning (IHL):

* Tuition and fees are paid directly to the school and are pro-rated based on the individual’s benefit level. For private IHL facilities, VA may reimburse up to theannual maximum per academic year for tuition and fees, unless the [“](https://vbaw.vba.va.gov/bl/22/manual/source-documents/glossary-terms.html)Grandfathering” provisionapplies.

* A Books and Supplies Stipend of up to $1,000 per academic year (pro-rated based on the individual’s benefit level) is paid to the student based on the number of credits in which he/she is enrolled in for each term.
* A Monthly Housing Allowance based on the Department of Defense’s (DoD’s) Basic Allowance for Housing (BAH) rate for the school’s ZIP Code [pro-rated based on the Rate of Pursuit (RoP) and individual’s benefit level]. It is paid to the student and re-released for each month of attendance until the end date of each term.
* Yellow Ribbon payments are paid directly to the school if the individual is eligible at the 100% benefit level, the charges exceed the tuition and fees payable, and the IHL is a Yellow Ribbon program participant.

**d. Training for NCD Programs at a NCD-Only Institution**

Effective October 1, 2011, the Post-9/11 GI Bill will pay the following benefits if a student chooses to attend a NCD program at a non-degree granting institution:

* The cost for in-state tuition and fees or the annual maximum for the academic year for tuition and fees, whichever is less. This is calculated after any waivers, scholarships, aid, and other assistance have been applied to the tuition and fee charges.
* A Monthly Housing Allowance based on the Department of Defense’s (DoD’s) Basic Allowance for Housing (BAH) rate for the school’s ZIP Code [pro-rated based on the Rate of Pursuit (RoP) and individual’s benefit level]. It is paid to the student and re-released for each month of attendance until the end date of each term.
* A Books and Supplies Stipend paid in a lump sum equivalent to $83 per month (pro-rated based on the individual’s benefit level) for the length of the enrollment.

Learn more about benefit payments.

***Sources***

[PL 111-377](https://www.congress.gov/111/plaws/publ377/PLAW-111publ377.pdf), Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act of 2010, Title II Other Educational Assistance Matters, Section 105. Educational Assistance for Programs of Education Other than Programs of Education Leading to a Degree

Training Slides PL111-377

**TOOLS**

Search WEAMS for a participating program

Last updated: 

Tuesday, October 6, 2015

 [Back to Top](#top)