# Chapter 33 Sub-Chapter 4.2 Tuition and Fees

**Chapter 33 Manual**

**Sub-Chapter 2. Tuition and Fees**

The Post-9/11 GI Bill (Chapter 33) offers benefits for service members, veterans, and dependents attending approved education and training programs taken at colleges or universities. Effective October 1, 2011, benefits can also be paid for additional non-college degree (NCD) programs including:

* Certificate programs at Non-College Degree (NCD)-granting Institutions
* Flight Training
* Correspondence Courses
* Licensing and Certification Test Reimbursement for multiple exams
* National Tests

In this section we will cover the following:

[2.01 Tuition and Fee Payments](#201)

[2.02 Restored Rates](#202)

[2.03 Test Reimbursement](#203)

 

**2.01 Tuition and Fee Payments**

---

**a. Payment Rates**

The Post-9/11 GI Bill benefit may pay up to 100% of tuition and fees for an individual pursing training. Payments are made directly to the school on the student’s behalf.

As part of the Post-9/11 GI Bill, VA will cover the following:

**b. Public IHLs**

Public Institutions of Higher Learning (IHLs): Up to 100% of the net costs for in-state tuition and fees. This includes tuition and fees for any approved undergraduate, graduate/professional, or NCD training program.

**c. Non-Public IHLs**

Private and Foreign IHLs, NCD-granting Institutions, Vocational Flight Schools, and Correspondence Schools: The net costs for in-state tuition and fees or the annual maximum for the academic year, whichever is less.

If a veteran goes to a school that costs less than the tuition cap, he or she will not receive payment for the difference between the actual tuition cost and the tuition cap.

**d. Pro-Rated Veterans**

Veterans who have served less than 3 years on active duty since September 10, 2001, or were not released due to a disability, will receive pro-rated payments based on their benefit level. 

**e. Yellow Ribbon**

The Post-9/11 GI Bill also includes the Yellow Ribbon Program—a provision to help students avoid out-of-pocket tuition and fee charges for IHL programs that exceed the Post-9/11 GI Bill tuition and fees benefit due to out-of-state charges or charges that exceed the annual maximum. Click on this link to learn more about the Yellow Ribbon Program.

**f. Fees**

For purposes of awarding Post-9/11 GI Bill benefits, “fees” include any mandatory charges (other than tuition, room, and board) for pursuit of an approved program of education. Fees include, but are not limited to, health premiums, freshman fees, graduation fees, sales taxes applied to a student's tuition and fees bill, and lab fees.

Fees do not include those charged for a study abroad course(s) unless the course(s) is a mandatory requirement for completion of the approved program of education. Fees can only be reported to VA on enrollment certifications if they are mandatory for all students.

**Issue:** There is a school that generally charges mandatory lab fees for all students. Occasionally, the school will waive the mandatory lab fees *for all students in a particular course during a particular term* in order to encourage students to enroll when participation is low. Consequently, a question was asked about whether the lab fees can be considered mandatory (and can be included on the net charges submitted to VA) if the fee is not charged during every term of enrollment.

**Decision:** If the lab fees are mandatory for all students in a particular course during a particular enrollment period, then the lab fees are considered “mandatory fees” *for that enrollment period* and should be reflected in the net charges reported to VA *for that enrollment period*. During enrollment periods where the lab fees are waived, the lab fees should not be reported on the enrollment certification. A fee does not have to be charged during every term of enrollment in order to be considered mandatory.

 

***Sources:***

[PL111-377](https://www.congress.gov/111/plaws/publ377/PLAW-111publ377.pdf) Training Slides

[PL 110-252](https://www.congress.gov/110/plaws/publ252/PLAW-110publ252.pdf), Chapter 33 Post-9/11 Educational Assistance, Subchapter II Educational Assistance, Section 3313. Educational assistance: amount; payment

[PL 111-377](https://www.congress.gov/111/plaws/publ377/PLAW-111publ377.pdf), Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act of 2010, Title II Other Educational Assistance Matters, Section 102. Amounts of Assistance for Programs of Education Leading to a Degree Pursued at Public, Non-public, and Foreign Institutions of Higher Learning

[PL 111-377](https://www.congress.gov/111/plaws/publ377/PLAW-111publ377.pdf), Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act of 2010, Title II Other Educational Assistance Matters, Section 105. Educational assistance for programs of education other than programs of education leading to a degree

Title [38 CFR 21.9505](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_19505)-Fees 

 [Go To Top](#top)

**2.02 Restored Rates**

---

**a. Grandfathered Rates**

Grandfathered students are covered under the Restoring GI Bill Fairness Act of 2011. This law allows the VA to pay more than $17,500 for tuition and fees for certain students attending private colleges and universities in seven states - Arizona, Michigan, New Hampshire, New York, Pennsylvania, South Carolina and Texas.

In order to qualify for the higher payments an individual must:

* Have pursued training at a private IHL in one of the seven specified states,
* Been a veteran or service member as of January 4, 2011.
* Have been enrolled in a program of education that had tuition and fee charges exceeding the $17,500 cap for full-time attendance for the 2010-2011 academic year and,
* Have been enrolled in the same private institution since January 4, 2011.

Grandfathered rates will last until the student graduates or until July 2014 (whichever is earlier).

***Sources:***

Restoring GI Bill Fairness Act of 2011: Questions and Answers

[PL 112-26](https://www.congress.gov/112/plaws/publ26/PLAW-112publ26.pdf), Restoring GI Bill Fairness Act of 2011, Section 2. Preservation of Higher Rates for Tuition and Fees for Programs of Education at Non-Public Institutions of Higher Learning Pursued by Individuals Enrolled in Such Programs Prior to Change in Maximum Amount

**2.03 Test Reimbursement**

---

**a. Background**

The Post-9/11 GI Bill reimburses students for taking approved national tests for admission to a college or university (e.g. SAT, LSAT, MCAT, etc.), or for obtaining college credit (e.g. AP exams, CLEP tests, etc.). The benefit will also reimburse students for taking multiple approved licensing or certification exams. 

**b. Licensing and Certification Tests**

Individuals may be reimbursed for multiple licensing and certification exams, up to $2,000 per test. Entitlement is deducted based on the cost of the test divided by a statutorily mandated amount for the academic year in which the test is taken ($1,460 for the 2011-2012 academic year), and rounding to the nearest whole, non-zero month. 

**c. National Tests**

Individuals may be reimbursed for multiple national tests. One month of entitlement (rounded to the nearest whole month) will be charged for each $1,460 paid. Entitlement is deducted based on the cost of the test divided by a statutorily mandated amount for the academic year in which the test is taken ($1,460 for the 2011-2012 academic year), and rounding to the nearest whole, non-zero month.

 

***Sources:***

[PL111-377](https://www.congress.gov/111/plaws/publ377/PLAW-111publ377.pdf) Training Slides

[PL 110-252](https://www.congress.gov/110/plaws/publ252/PLAW-110publ252.pdf), Chapter 33 Post-9/11 Educational Assistance, Subchapter II Educational Assistance, Section 3315. Licensure and certification tests.

[PL 111-377](https://www.congress.gov/111/plaws/publ377/PLAW-111publ377.pdf), Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act of 2010, Title II Other Educational Assistance Matters, Section 107. Availability of assistance for licensure and certification tests.

[PL 111-377](https://www.congress.gov/111/plaws/publ377/PLAW-111publ377.pdf), Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act of 2010, Title II Other Educational Assistance Matters, Section 108. National tests

Last updated: 

October 6, 2015

Go to Top