# Sub-Chapter 11. Active Duty Training

**Sub-Chapter 11. Active Duty Training**

Under the Post-9/11 GI Bill (chapter 33), service members can receive educational benefits while serving on active duty. The same rules apply to the spouses of individuals on active duty using transferred entitlement.

**a. Benefit Payment Details**

Prior to March 5, 2011, service members eligible for the Post-9/11 GI Bill are automatically awarded benefits at the 100% benefit level.

Effective March 5, 2011, payments for individuals on active duty are subject to proration based on benefit-level calculations (40%–100%) for enrollment in a *degree program* and *training at more than one-half time* (a Rate of Pursuit greater than .50) at a public Institution of Higher Learning (IHL).

Effective August 1, 2011, payments for individuals on active duty are subject to proration based on benefit-level calculations (40%-100%) regardless of the type of training, Rate of Pursuit, or type of IHL.

The benefit level is calculated based on the aggregate amount of qualifying service accrued as of the beginning date of the enrollment period. This is identical to how the benefit level is calculated for dependent children using entitlement transferred by a parent on active duty.

Individuals pursuing programs of education while on active duty can receive the following benefits:

* Tuition and Fees
* Books and Supplies stipend (effective October 1, 2011)

Payment amounts are calculated the same as for Veterans. Individuals on active duty (and their spouses using transferred entitlement) are not eligible for Monthly Housing Allowance or Yellow Ribbon benefits.

Learn more about benefit payments.

 

**Sources**

[PL 111-377](https://www.congress.gov/111/plaws/publ377/PLAW-111publ377.pdf), Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act of 2010, Title II Other Educational Assistance Matters, Section 103. Amounts of assistance for programs of education leading to a degree pursued on active duty

Electronic Code of Federal Regulations, [§ 21.9525 Eligibility for increased and supplemental educational assistance](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_19525)

Electronic Code of Federal Regulations, [§ 21.9560 Entitlement charges](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_19560)                                      

Training Slides PL111-377

Last updated: 

October 6, 2015