# Part 7: Chapter 8 - Miscellaneous

**Part 7: Chapter 8 - Miscellaneous**

[8.01  General](#801)  
  
**[Subchapter 1](#SI). HINES and BIRLS Issues**  
[8.02  Paying a Second Spouse or Tenth Child](#802)  
[8.03  [DEA Claims Establishment Processing]](#803)  
  
**[Subchapter 2](#SII). Duplication Education Records - Chapters 34 and 35**  
[8.04  Potential Duplicate Education Master Records](#804)  
[8.05  Processing Folders for Potentially Duplicate Education Master Records](#805)  
[8.06  Inactive Records for Potentially Duplicate Education Master Records](#806)  
[8.07  Adjudication Action for Potentially Duplicate Education Master Records](#807)  
  
**[Subchapter 3.](#SIII) Review of Old Type A Cases - Chapters 34 and 35**  
[8.08  Review of Type A Records](#808)  
[8.09  Verifying Attendance Information](#809)  
[8.10  Type A Running Cases](#810)  
[8.11  Type A Suspended Cases](#811)  
[8.12  Diary](#812)  
[8.13  Preventive Measures](#813)  
  
**[Subchapter 4](#SIV). Duplicate Inactive and Active Chapter 34 Records**  
[8.14  Identification of Duplicate Inactive and Active Chapter 34 Education Master Records](#814)  
[8.15  Review and Correction of Duplicate Inactive and Active Chapter 34 Education Master Records](#815)

 **8.01 GENERAL**

---

This chapter provides miscellaneous procedures unique to chapter 35 claims processing.  It also includes certain information concerning chapter 34 processing which must be retained.  Chapter 34 and 35 benefits are paid by the same Hines [BDN (Benefits Delivery Network)] system as noted in chapter 2.

**a**.  [Subchapter I](#SI) covers paying a second spouse or tenth (or higher number) child and certain CEST (Claims Establishment) procedures.

**b.** [Subchapter II](#SII) covers the periodic review of duplicate chapter 34 and 35 master records.

**c.**  [Subchapter III](#SIII) gives procedures for handling certain old type A master records.

**d.** [Subchapter IV](#SIV) covers the periodic review of duplicate active and inactive chapter 34 records. 

**SUBCHAPTER I.  HINES AND BIRLS ISSUES**

**8.02  PAYING A SECOND SPOUSE OR TENTH CHILD**

---

**a**.  The chapter 35 system does not currently allow operators to establish records for more than one spouse or more than nine children. If an operator needs to establish such an additional record, in most cases an existing Hines benefit record can be used if necessary adjustments are made.

**b.**  Determine the existing Hines master record to be adjusted as follows:

(1)  If the claim is for a second or subsequent spouse, use the existing payee 10 record.

(2)  If the claim is for a tenth or subsequent child, determine which existing child's record (payee 41 through 49) is appropriate for adjustment action.

(i)  Use the record for a child that is beyond the delimiting date (to include any allowable extensions in delimiting dates).

(ii)  If no child is beyond his or her extended delimiting date, review all records to determine if any payee has used all of his or her benefits.

(iii)  If no suitable child's record is found (i.e., no payee is beyond the extended delimiting date or has used all of his or her benefits), pay the case out-of-system.  (See [subpar. f](#802f).)

**c**.  In all cases, prepare a DEA (Dependents' Educational Assistance) folder.

(1)  Designate the folder for the second spouse as XXX-XX-XXXX - W(2).  XXX-XX-XXXX stands for the folder number (the   same number as the veteran's file number).  "W(2)" represents the alpha designation for the second spouse.  "W(3)" would be the alpha designation for the third spouse.  Annotate the inactive folder to show that a different spouse is using the same suffix.  Store the  previous (inactive) DEA folder in inactive storage.

(2)  If a suitable child's record is located as described in subparagraph b above, follow the procedures in subparagraph d to establish this record for the new payee.  If the previous DEA folder number was XXX-XX-XXXX - A, designate the new folder as XXX-XX-XXXX - A (2).  Annotate the inactive folder to show that another child is using the same suffix.  Store the previous (inactive) DEA   folder in inactive storage.

(3)  If a suitable child's record is not located, designate the DEA folder for the tenth child as XXX-XX-XXXX - J.  "J" represents the alpha designation for the tenth child.  "K" would be the designation for the eleventh child.  Out-of-system processing is required for these payees (see [subpar. f](#802f)).

**d.**  If an operator selects an existing record to use for the new payee, take the following actions:

(1)  Request Central Office to purge the existing Hines [BDN] master record for the former payee.  [(See pt. II, par. 8.10, for purging procedures.  The master record that needs to be purged cannot be active (type A master record) and cannot have a debt (accounts receivable).  If the master record is running, stations should terminate the award.  If the master record has a debt, stations should have the Finance activity transfer the debt to another account for that previous applicant.  Before calling Central Office to purge the existing master record for the former applicant, be sure to verify the current claimant's eligibility and delimiting date.  (See the NOTE below.  Also, see par. 1.05 for periods of eligibility for spouses and surviving spouses and par. 3.03 for establishing qualifying    service-connected disability or death.)

*NOTE:  When a veteran is alive and has had no change in his or her service-connected permanent and total rating, a second spouse has a separate 45 months of benefits but retains the first spouse's delimiting date.]*

(2)  Request that the BIRLS Adjustment Unit at the RPC (Records Processing Center) delete the BIRLS BID (Beneficiary Identification Data) record for the selected payee.  The unit chief or higher designee will send a request using Outlook e-mail to   [VAVBASTL/RMC/UPD](mailto:224B.VBAVACO@va.gov ?subject=Part%207%3A%20Chapter%208%20-%20Miscellaneous).  The request will ask the RMC to use the RDEL (Record Deletion) command to delete the BIRLS BID   record.  It must also specify why the record needs to be deleted from BIRLS.

**e**.  After the deletion of both the Hines BDN master record and the BIRLS BID record for the appropriate payee, use the CEST    command to establish the new Hines and BIRLS records.  In the new BIRLS BID record, enter the appropriate information for the new   payee.  In the new Hines BDC record, enter the appropriate information for the new payee.

**f.** If no suitable child's record is found (no payee is beyond the extended delimiting date or has used all of his or her benefits), process the award out-of-system in accordance with part IV, chapter 12.  Keep a detailed written accounting of entitlement used, similar to the entitlement record for education loans beyond a claimant's delimiting date.  (See par. 7.08e.)  BIRLS will not track these records.

**8.03  DEA CLAIMS ESTABLISHMENT PROCESSING**

---

(See M21-1, pt. II, ch. 1, for CEST (Claims Establishment) processing in general.)   DEA CEST processing has unique CEST processing described below.  This paragraph now includes [both] normal CEST processing (for original DEA claims) and [unique] CEST processing (to establish BIRLS records on supplemental claims where a DEA claimant already has a Hines master record).

*NOTE:  Use the SINQ (Status Record Inquiry) command to review master records.  (See pt. II, par. 3.02.)*

**a.  Claims Establishment Actions to Update BIRLS on Original DEA Claims.**  For original DEA claims, take the following actions:

(1)  Complete the Ready Screen.  Enter the command CEST, the operator's password, the veteran's file number, the payee number, the end product code, the benefit (CH35), the veteran's stub name, and the claimant's full name.  Press the Enter key.

(2)  BIRLS will show the VID (Veterans Identification Data) screen.  Enter any appropriate information for the veteran.  Then enter   "UPD" (Update) in the NEXT SCREEN field (located at the bottom right hand side of the displayed VID screen).

(3)  When CEST is for the first beneficiary, BIRLS shows the BID screen for that payee.  Complete the BID screen as follows:

(i)  Enter the beneficiary's date of birth, sex, and social security number.

(ii)  Find the field "ESTABLISH A \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ FOLDER" located toward the bottom of the screen.  Enter "Y" in the field immediately to the left of the word "ESTABLISH."  Enter "DEA" in the blank located between "ESTABLISH A" and "FOLDER."

(iii)  Enter "UPD" (to update the BID record for the payee) in the NEXT SCREEN field.

(iv)  Press the Enter key.

(4)  When CEST is for the second or subsequent payees, BIRLS shows the BID screen for the first payee if only one payee has already been established or the NUM (Number) screen if two or more payees have already been established.  In either case, enter ADD in the NEXT SCREEN field to obtain the BID screen for the payee being established.  Complete the BID screen for the payee being established as follows:

(i)  Enter the beneficiary's date of birth, sex, and social security number.

(ii)  Find the field "ESTABLISH A \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ FOLDER" located toward the bottom of the screen.  Enter "Y" in the field immediately to the left of the word "ESTABLISH."  Enter "DEA" in the blank located between "ESTABLISH A" and "FOLDER."

(iii)  Enter "UPD" (to update the BID record for the payee) in the NEXT SCREEN field.

(iv)  Press the Enter key.

(5)  BDN will show the 101 Pending Issue Control Establishment screen.  Process as usual.

(6)  Use the BINQ (BIRLS Inquiry) command to review the BID record established.  BIRLS should show the BID record established.  The BID record should show the identification information entered for the claimant and the existence of the DEA folder.

**b.  Claims Establishment Actions to Update BIRLS on Supplemental DEA Claims** 

(1)  If the chapter 35 beneficiary already has a Hines master record but does not have a BIRLS BID record (or a DEA folder in the BID record), process as in paragraph a, except during the CEST action, also enter "VID" (Veteran Identification Data) in the SCREEN NUMBER field at the top of the Ready Screen.  (The entry of "VID" keys the system to access BIRLS.)

(2)  If the chapter 35 beneficiary already has a Hines master record and has a BIRLS BID record with a DEA folder in the BID record, but the BIRLS information for the individual is incomplete or wrong in the BID record, use the BUPD (BIRLS Update) command to update the BIRLS information in the BID record.  Enter the correct information; then enter "UPD" in the NEXT SCREEN field.

(3)  If the chapter 35 beneficiary does not already have a Hines master record but has a BIRLS BID record with a DEA folder in the BID record, use the CEST command to process an award and establish the Hines master record.

 

**SUBCHAPTER II.  DUPLICATE EDUCATION RECORDS - CHAPTERS 34 AND 35**

*NOTE:  Although chapter 34 expired on December 31, 1989, some individuals may qualify for continued benefits as chapter 30, category II claimants.  (See pt. V, ch. 1, for the definition of category II.)  Adjudicators must continue to consolidate duplicate chapter 34 and 35 education records and adjust the remaining entitlement on the retained record.  If the chapter 34 record of such a chapter 30 claimant is adjusted, the chapter 30 RPO (regional processing office) will be forced to reprocess the BDN 310 screen when the next award is processed.  The entitlement in the chapter 30 benefit record will be adjusted at that time.*

**8.04  POTENTIAL DUPLICATE EDUCATION MASTER RECORDS**

---

This subchapter provides instructions for reviewing and correcting potentially duplicate education records.  An audit to identify master records with the same SSN (social security number) will run every April and October.  These semiannual audits should identify fewer records each time.  Regional offices will receive listings, cards, and writeouts from each audit about May 1 for the audit in April and about November 1 for the audit in October.

**a.  Reviews.**  Regional offices will review and, when necessary, correct or consolidate, as appropriate, potentially duplicate education records referred to them before the next semiannual audit.  Those records which were not adjusted will be identified again on the next audit.

**b.  Categories of Cases.**  The terms "pair of cases" and "paired cases" refer to two or more records with the same SSN.  Each pair of cases identified in these audits is broken down into one of the following categories:

(1)  Category 1 - SSNs and stub names match and award dates overlap.  Duplicate payments may have been or are being issued for cases in this category.

(2)  Category 2 - SSNs and stub names match but award dates do not overlap.  In these cases there may be excessive entitlement used.

(3)  Category 3 - SSNs and one other item of miscellaneous information match (no stub name match).  Many of these cases also involve duplicate records for the same claimant.

(4)  Category 4 - Only SSNs match.  The SSN is probably erroneous in one record.

*NOTE:  If more than two records have the same SSN, those records are automatically assigned to category 1.*

**c.  Assignment of Jurisdiction.**  Because a substantial number of paired cases identified by the audit have folders located in different regional offices or in the RPC, jurisdiction is assigned as follows: 

(1)  If only one of the "pair of cases" has a running award, jurisdiction is assigned to the regional office with that record.

(2)  If one folder is located in the RPC and the other folder is located in a regional office, jurisdiction is assigned to the regional office.

(3)  If both records are located in the RPC, jurisdiction is assigned to the regional office of record for the case with the latest "Last Activity" date.

(4)  If both folders are located in regional offices and both awards either are running or terminated, jurisdiction is assigned to the regional office having the record with the latest "Last Activity" date.

**d.  Identification of Duplicate Records.**  Each regional office should receive a package from Hines BDC about the first of the month following the audit.  The package will be routed to the Adjudication Officer (21) with a label reading: "POTENTIAL DUPLICATE

EDUCATION FOLDERS."  The package will contain the following:

(1)  Listing of Folders.  A listing by category (COIN EDU 227) of all pairs of cases assigned to the regional office will be printed.  The listing should be used to control the adjustment of cases in the project.  The listing will be in SSN order, within category, in the       following format:

| SSN | NAME | PAYEE FILE NO. | TYPE NO. | FILE M/R | FLDR STATUS | LOCATION |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 123456789 | J T VETER | 98 765 432 | 00 | A | ACTIVE | 06 |
|  | J T VETER | 34 567 890 | 00 | E | INACTIVE | 76 |

*NOTE:  On this list, a type A M/R (master record) represents a running award.  A type E master record represents a terminated award.  A type J master record represents a disallowed award.*

(2)  Cards.  A deck of cards for each regional office of jurisdiction will correspond to COIN EDU 227.  The cards for each regional office are arranged first by case category, then by terminal digit, and finally by full file number within each terminal digit.  Each card will  indicate the regional office of jurisdiction, file number, payee number, stub name, SSN, folder location, and case category.

(3)  Master Record Writeouts

(i)  VA Form 20-8270a, Education Master Record - Audit Writeout, is produced for each folder and arranged by file number.  The writeouts will be used for analysis of individual cases.  Regional offices may receive writeouts for cases not shown on COIN EDU  227 or represented by a card. These additional writeouts may occur when there are multiple payees under the same file number in      chapter 35 cases. In such cases, if a writeout is not shown on the listing or represented by a card, it should be disposed of in accordance with Records Control Schedule RCS VB-I, part I, item No. 13-052.000.

(ii)  The writeouts will be issued under message code 001, GENERAL INQUIRY-STATION NO. XX, if the case is active, or 001Z, REPLY TO GENERAL INQUIRY (INACT)-STA. NO. XX, if the case is on the inactive system.  The "Routing" block on the lower right will show the regional office of jurisdiction.

(iii)  If the folder is shown in the system as being located at the RPC, the message on the writeout will indicate the number of the regional office that transferred the folder to the RPC, not "76" as shown on COIN EDU 227 and on the cards.  To determine if a folder is in the RPC using only the writeout, refer to the "Other Control Data" block in the upper right portion of the writeout.  If one of the following is printed to the right of "A" in that block, the folder is in the RPC: A, B, C, J, K, L, &, or -.

(iv)  The SSNs are shown in the block "Reference Numbers" located above the message block.  Chapter 34 cases have SSNs preceded by an "A".  Chapter 35 cases have SSNs preceded by a "B."  If the SSN is also the file number, the SSN may not appear in the "Reference Numbers" block.

**8.05  PROCESSING FOLDERS FOR POTENTIALLY DUPLICATE EDUCATION MASTER RECORDS**

---

**a.  General**

(1)  An individual or a group of individuals should be designated to process the cases as a project assignment.

(2)  Cases will be processed in the following order:

(i)  Any pair of cases in categories 1, 2, and 3 in which one of the records is a type A record and the other is a type A, E, or J master record.  All such cases should be corrected as quickly as possible since there is a possibility of erroneous payments currently being made.

(ii)  All remaining cases in category 1 will then be processed followed by cases in categories 2, 3, and 4, in that order.

**b.  Locating Folders**

(1)  The cards will be used to pull folders which are located in the regional office of jurisdiction; i.e., the number of the regional office of jurisdiction is the same as the folder location.  After the folders are pulled, place cards in the disposal file and destroy in accordance with Records Control Schedule VB-1, part I, item No. 13-038.600.

(i)  For folders not in the regional office of jurisdiction (i.e., the number of the regional office of jurisdiction is not the same as the folder location), the cards will be used by the correspondence clerk to request a transfer-in of such cases by using the "BFLD" (BIRLS Folder) command.

(ii)  Transfer-in cases will be controlled by the correspondence clerk of the unit to which the folder will be routed.

(iii)  The Transfer Pending file will be clearly annotated to indicate that the case requires special handling under this project.

(2)  Regional offices with a large number of transfer-in cases may choose to wait for these cases to be received before pulling the corresponding cases within the regional office.  This will require using the listing to match up the cards by SSN, and then turning over both cards to the correspondence clerk requesting the transfer-in.  When the incoming case is received, the card for the other case can be released for folder pull.

(3)  All folders with these cards attached will be routed to a control point for review.

(4)  Folders will be carefully reviewed in pairs.  Cases involving two different claimants will be adjusted in accordance with paragraph8.07a.  If both cases pertain to the same claimant, adjustments will be made in accordance with paragraphs 8.07b and c.

**c.  Minimizing Folder Transfers.**  A number of paired cases have a different regional office location for each of the folders. To   minimize folder transfer, first attempt to determine if the paired cases involve two different claimants by comparing the writeouts. Comparisons should be made by using service dates and numbers, claimant date of birth, child date of birth, etc.

(1)  If it cannot be determined whether the cases involve different claimants by comparing the writeouts, then:<

(i)  If the other folder is in the RPC, request the transfer-in of that folder for review and correction.

(ii)  If the other folder is in a regional office, telephone the appropriate unit in that regional office for a folder extract.  The extract should include sufficient identifying data, if available, to include but not be limited to the following: service information (to include dates, branch, rank and service numbers), date of birth, and place of birth.  If a determination still cannot be made after the extract, request the transfer-in of the folder.

(2)  If both of the paired records pertain to the same claimant, request the transfer-in of the folder located in the other regional office so that both records can be consolidated.

(3)  When each of the paired records pertain to different claimants, try, whenever possible, to adjust these records without requesting the transfer-in of the other folder.  In these cases, one of the paired records has an erroneous SSN reference number which must be corrected as outlined in [paragraph 8.07a](#807a) below.  There is also the possibility that the file number is also incorrect if it was based on the erroneous SSN.

(i)  If the record located in your regional office has the erroneous SSN, then the transfer-in of the other folder is not necessary.  The correction should be made and the writeout annotated and filed in the folder.  The writeout for the duplicate record should be disposed of in accordance with Records Control Schedule VB-1, part I, item No. 13.052.000.

(ii)  If the record with the erroneous SSN is located in the RPC, request the transfer-in of the folder for corrective action.

(iii)  If the record with the erroneous SSN is located in another regional office, telephone the regional office to indicate the required adjustments. This regional office will be responsible for making the corrections.  Annotate the writeout for this record to show that the telephone contact was made, and forward it to the other regional office for drop-filing.

(4)  Folders which are transferred in as part of this project should be returned to the proper regional office of jurisdiction as soon as the above adjustments are made.  Do not return folders to the RPC.

**8.06  INACTIVE RECORDS FOR POTENTIALLY DUPLICATE EDUCATION MASTER RECORDS**

---

**a**.  Only chapter 34 educational records can be inactive.  If a chapter 34 record is inactive, it must be reactivated using the alternate means of input before it can be corrected or canceled (purged).  (See ch. 2.)  BDN shows only the M25 screen when the record is inactive.  Inactive records are also identified as such on the COIN EDU 227 listings.  If a cancellation of an inactive record is attempted without reactivation, the BIRLS record is canceled, but not the inactive education record.  Some of the inactive records    identified in this project will not have a corresponding BIRLS record under the same file number for this reason.

**b.**  Stations will reactivate records which do not have a BIRLS record by using the alternate means of input and submitting a transaction 23 (reactivation of records) for each record.  Stations should not have to reactivate any records which have a BIRLS record; however, if necessary, use the alternate means of input to activate these inactive records by also submitting a transaction 23 for each record. (See ch. 2, par. 2.07.)

**c.**  Following the submission of the transaction 23, stations will monitor the master record for reactivation.  If the record does not   reactivate after 1 cycle month, resubmit the transaction using the alternate means of input.

**d**.  If the inactive record(s) do not activate within 3 cycles following the second submission, send the following information via E-Mail to [MAIL VBA 22](mailto:224B.VBAVACO@va.gov ?subject=Part%207%3A%20Chapter%208%20-%20Miscellaneous) for further delivery to the [Education Systems Staff (224B):](mailto:224B.VBAVACO@va.gov ?subject=Part%207%3A%20Chapter%208%20-%20Miscellaneous)

(1)  The File Number.  If the file number is an SSN, enter the 9-digit SSN.  If the file number is a claim number, enter the 8-digit number. Show C 624 592 as "00624592".

(2)  The Transaction.  Specify transaction 23.

(3)  Office of Jurisdiction.  Specify RPC (376) as the station having jurisdiction over all cases with inactive master records.

(4)  Claimant's Stub Name.  Specify the first initial, the middle initial (if one exists), and the first five letters of the claimant's name.  If a middle initial does not exist, leave the space for the middle initial blank.

(5)  Regional Office Number.   Specify the last two digits of your regional office number.  For example, regional office 320 will enter "20."

**e.**  The Education Systems Staff will coordinate with Hines BDC via E-Mail for the reactivation of the record.  Following the reactivation of the record, the Education Systems Staff will coordinate with the regional office.

**f.**  If necessary, coordinate with the Education Systems Staff at [(202) 273-7168].

**8.07  ADJUDICATION ACTION FOR POTENTIALLY DUPLICATE EDUCATION MASTER RECORDS**

---

**a.  Correction of Erroneous SSNs**

(1)  Paired cases involving different claimants will require an adjustment of the erroneous SSN by using the alternate means of input. Request an 02V correction to field 204, SSN Veteran, (for a veteran) or to field 214, SSN Persons Entitled, (for a chapter 35 eligible person).  Send the request to the alternate means of input control point.  (See ch. 2.)

(2)  Efforts should be made to resolve all pairs of cases that have the same SSN in the education record.

(i)  If a review of these cases and contacts with the payees do not reveal which one is under the incorrect SSN, change the SSN in the appropriate field to 999-99-9999.  This will prevent these cases from being selected on future audits.  This procedure will not work if the file number is an SSN.

(ii)  In these cases, do not change the SSN in the BIRLS record.

(iii)  Annotate the folder to indicate the change in SSN in the education record.

(3)  Check the BIRLS record to determine if the SSN in that record is correct.  If not, correct the SSN by using the BDN BUPD (BIRLS Update) command if the SSN is not the file number.  If the SSN is the file number, request that the BIRLS Adjustment Unit at the RPC change the BIRLS record.  The unit chief or higher designee will send a request using Wang Office to MAIL [VBA RPC/BIRLS ADJ](mailto:224B.VBAVACO@va.gov ?subject=List%3A08%20-Miscellaneous). The request must state that the RPC should change the file number due to duplicate SSN processing.

**b.  Cases Involving the Same Claimant - Two Folders.**  Adjustment of cases involving two separate folders for the same claimant will require a number of actions.

(1)  If one or both of the awards are running, first determine if the claimant has been overpaid.

(i)  If so, suspend the master record of the record(s) with the running award.

(ii)  Dictate a letter to the claimant informing him or her of the action taken and the reason for the action.

(2)  Review each folder and determine the following:

(i)  Award periods involving duplicate payments.

(ii)  The total amount of entitlement used under both file numbers.

(3)   Determine which file number is to be retained using the criteria outlined in M21-1, part II, chapter 3.  An exception to these criteria will apply when only one record has entitlement used.  In these cases, the record which has entitlement used should be retained.

(4)  Consolidate the records as described in M21-1, part II, chapter 3.  If the attempted consolidation of records fails, request that Central Office cancel (purge) one of the records.  (See pt. II, ch. 8.)

(5)  Charge the entitlement used under the canceled file number against the retained number.  *(NOTE:  Do not charge the entitlement *used for any period for which an accounts receivable is to be established.)*  Entitlement can be charged by making a CORR (Correction) on a BDN M23 screen to the fields, PRIOR VA TRNG TYPE and PRIOR VA TRNG TIME.*

*(6)  Dictate a letter to the claimant informing him or her of all pertinent information, to include the reconciliation of the duplicate accounts, change of program information, adjustment of entitlement, and appellate rights.*

*(7)  If an A/R (accounts receivable) is to be established under the retained number, route the folder to the Finance activity.  Indicate on the writeouts all periods of overlap for which an accounts receivable should be established.  The writeout should be annotated, CREATE A/R FROM (MO DAY YR) TO (MO DAY YR).  Indicate all pertinent dates and rates.  Finance will compute the amount of the  accounts receivable and establish this debt with a transaction 04E in the retained record.  Finance will also inform the claimant of the amount and reason for the overpayment and include appellate rights.*

**c.  Cases Involving the Same Claimant - One Folder.**  In a limited number of cases, there are two Hines BDC master records established for the same veteran but only one folder.  Only one BIRLS record is established.  This situation usually results from a file number digit being transposed during an award transaction or a previous unsuccessful attempt to cancel a duplicate file number.  The procedures outlined in subparagraph b above will apply to these cases except that an adjustment to BIRLS is not required.  If the   BIRLS file number is incorrect, request that the RPC Adjustment Unit change the file number.  Process a transaction 26 (Adjustment   of Duplicate File Number) using the alternate means of input to the Hines BDC education record only.  When the transaction 26 does   not process and two Hines BDC records continue to exist, request that the appropriate record be canceled (purged).

**d.  Work Measurement.**  Take an EPC (end product code) for each pair of records reviewed and all necessary action completed on the pair.  Only one appropriate EPC is allowed for any one pair of records.  For chapter 34 cases, this is end product 210.  For chapter 35 cases, this is end product 250.

**e.  Potential Fraud.**  All duplicate file number cases involving overpayments should be reviewed for evidence of fraud, particularly when the applicant did not indicate having previously received education benefits, or has received duplicate payments on a recurring basis.  Refer such cases to the Office of Inspector General.  (See current directives.)  Letters sent to claimants as described in [subparagraph](#807b1ii)[b(1)(ii)](#807b1ii) and [(6)](#807b6) will not mention that fraud is a consideration.

**SUBCHAPTER III.  REVIEW FOR OLD TYPE A CASES - CHAPTER 34 AND 35**

**8.08  REVIEW OF TYPE A RECORDS**

---

Semiannually, Adjudication Divisions receive error messages 999 "ACCOUNT IN SUSPENSE 12 MONTHS OR MORE", 998 "ACCOUNT IN SUSPENSE 6 MONTHS", and 931 "ACCOUNT NOT PAID FOR 12 MONTHS OR MORE".  BDN generates these error messages for suspended awards and type A running awards not receiving recurring payments.  Adjudication must properly terminate these cases.

**8.09  VERIFYING ATTENDANCE INFORMATION**

---

**a**.  In many cases, the claimant's folder does not have the last date of attendance.

(1)  Contact the school and the student for the necessary information in these cases.

(2)  Establish an appropriate EPC for 45 days.  For chapter 34 cases, this is end product 210.  For chapter 35 cases, this is end product 250.

**b**.  If the school or the claimant does not send the information within the time limit, continue the control and recontact the school and the student for this necessary information.

**c**.  If the school or the claimant cannot furnish the information, see part IV, chapter 1.

*NOTE:  It is not acceptable to terminate these cases DLP (date last paid).  They must be terminated properly under the procedures established in part IV, chapter 11.*

**8.10  TYPE A RUNNING CASES**

---

When an operator terminates a running NCD (non-college degree) case, he or she should always provide certification information from DLC (Date Last Certified) through the last date of attendance.  Since the number of absences has had no bearing on payment since December 18, 1989, enter zeros for absences after this date.

**a.**  Use the STOP command to terminate an account on or before the DLC.

**b**.  Use the CERT (Certification) command as a "quit" certification to terminate a case after DLC to pay for additional school attendance.

**c**.  Use the CDAT (Claims Data Entry) or CADJ (Claims Adjudication) command if award action is necessary.  Also, complete the 317 General Certification screen under these BDN commands.

*NOTE:  At some point, these type A running cases were automatically terminated for a delinquent certificate of attendance.  These cases were then reestablished as type A by an amended award to extend the ending date.  These cases have remained type A running cases because DLP and DLC are equal.  The automatic termination in these cases is the cause of the overpayment which often exists.  The automatic termination may be noted from award letters in the folder or from transaction codes 95 for automatic termination or from transaction code 94 from automatic suspension.*

**8.11  TYPE A SUSPENDED CASES**

---

**a.**  Use the STOP, the CDAT, or the CADJ command to terminate a suspended IHL (institution of higher learning) award.

**b**.  Use the STOP command to terminate an NCD suspended case on or before the DLC.  If the account must be terminated after DLC, process an amended award with certification information or process a resume payment and a "quit" certification, with both transactions being entered the same day.

**c.**  For cases suspended on account of the death of the claimant, see part IV, chapter 11.

**8.12  DIARY**

---

Establish a local diary for 1 month on each case to ensure that it was properly terminated.  Alternately, hold the folder and review it for proper termination before releasing it back to files.

**8.13  PREVENTIVE MEASURES**

---

Old type A cases should not occur if operators take the proper adjudicative action.  Additional preventive measures follow:

**a.**  Take prompt action whenever a notice is received that an account is suspended for any reason other than a delinquent certification. Establish an end product control if necessary.

**b.**  Always enter certificate of attendance information in NCD cases with an original or reentrance award if the folder shows that the claimant has already terminated training.

**SUBCHAPTER IV.  DUPLICATE INACTIVE AND ACTIVE CHAPTER 34 RECORDS**

**8.14 IDENTIFICATION OF DUPLICATE INACTIVE AND ACTIVE CHAPTER 34 EDUCATION MASTER RECORDS**

---

An audit of chapter 34 master records is run each March and September which identifies pairs of active and inactive records having the same file number and stub name.  A very small number of these pairs of records are now being identified; therefore, most regional offices will have no records referred to them for review.

**a.  Purge of Inactive Records.**  The inactive record of each pair of records is purged (canceled).  To consolidate these duplicate records, the necessary information from the purged record will be used to correct or adjust, as necessary, the active (retained) record of the pair.

(1)  A VA Form 20-8270a is issued for each purged (inactive) record with message 965, "DUPLICATE M/R'S-INACTIVE M/R PURGED-REVIEW."  The writeouts show the information in the inactive master records at the time they were purged.

(2)  The writeouts will be mailed to each regional office from VA Central Office in April for the audit in March, and in October for the audit in September. The writeouts will be in an envelope addressed to the Adjudication Officer and will be further identified by an OF 41 with the notation "Writeouts From Purge of Chapter 34 Inactive Records."

**b.  Assignment of Jurisdiction.**  Jurisdiction of the writeout for the purged inactive record is assigned to the regional office having jurisdiction of the active (retained) record as of the date the audit is run.

(1)  If the active folder has been transferred to another regional office, mail the writeout to the Adjudication Officer of that regional office identifying the purpose of the writeout and citing this paragraph.

(2)  If the retained folder has since been retired to the RPC Buffalo, request transfer-in of that folder.

**8.15  REVIEW AND CORRECTION OF DUPLICATE INACTIVE AND ACTIVE CHAPTER 34 EDUCATION MASTER RECORDS**

---

The writeouts should be reviewed as soon as possible.  Highest priority should be given to cases in which the purged record is a type E record.  Use BDN whenever possible to review the active record and to adjust that record, as appropriate.  Before any correction or adjustment is made to the active record, ensure that both the active (retained) and purged (inactive) records belong to the same veteran.

**a.  Correction of Entitlement Used.**  To determine the entitlement used, review the writeout for the inactive records, the BDN master record screens for the active record, and the claimant's folder.  The entitlement used in the purged type E record must be reflected in the retained record.

(1)  If the total entitlement used in the retained record is less than the actual total used, enter the difference as chapter 34 prior training.

(i)  Notify the veteran by dictated letter of the adjustment to entitlement.  Include appellate rights.

(ii)  Make any other necessary adjustments to the record.

(2)  If entitlement is exhausted because of the additional entitlement used, adjust the ending date or terminate the award, as appropriate. Allow for the appropriate extension of entitlement.

(i)  Annotate the folder "Administrative Error - Claimant Not Eligible For Education Benefits."  Prepare an administrative decision, as appropriate.

(ii)  Suppress the generated letter and notify the veteran by dictated letter of the reason for the termination of the award or for the   adjustment to the ending date.  Include appellate rights.

(iii)  Make any other necessary changes to the record.

(3)  To correct entitlement used, charge entitlement used in the purged record against the retained record.  Charge entitlement by making a CORR correction on the BDN M23 screen to the fields PRIOR VA TRNG TYPE and PRIOR VA TRNG TIME.

**b.  Purged Record is Disallowed.**  If the purged record is disallowed, review both records.  Verify the accuracy of the disallowance if the retained record is not also a disallowed record.

(1)  If the disallowance is proper, terminate the award for the retained record effective DLP and annotate the folder as in subparagraph [a](#815a2i)[(2)(i)](#815a2i) above.

(2)  If the type of training requires a certification, suspend the award and obtain any necessary certification information before terminating the award effective DLP.

(3)  Suppress the generated letter.  Notify the veteran by dictated letter that he or she is not eligible for education benefits and include appellate rights.

(4)  Make any other corrections necessary to the retained record.

**c.  Completion of Project.**  Regional offices should complete the review as soon as possible.  All write outs are to be destroyed in accordance with RCS VB-1, part I, item No. 08-041.000.