# Part 4: Chapter 10 - Advance and Special Payments

**Part 4: Chapter 10 - Advance and Special Payments**

 

**[Subchapter 1](#SI). Advance Payments**  
[10.01  General](#1001)  
[10.02  Definition and Eligibility Requirements](#1002)  
[10.03  Advance Payment Not Payable](#1003)  
[10.04  Advance Payment Award Information](#1004)  
[10.05  Earliest Processing Date for Advance Payment Award](#1005)   
[10.06  Latest Processing Date for Advance Payment Award](#1006)  
[10.07  Special Payment for Advance Payment Request](#1007)  
[10.08  Processing Advance Payment Award on a Chapter 35 A-Type  Master Record](#1008)  
[10.09  Issuance of Advance Payment Award Letter](#1009)  
[10.10  Issuance of Advance Payment Check](#1010)  
[10.11  Issuance of VA Form 22-1999V](#1011)  
[10.12  Advance Payment Applied to Accounts Receivable](#1012)  
[10.13  Processing Changes to Master Records After Processing Advance  Payment Award](#1013)  
[10.14  Delivery and Return of Advance Payment Check](#1014)  
[10.15  Receipt of Certification of Delivery and Clearing the Bar or Control](#1015)  
[10.16  Delinquent Certification of Delivery and Automatic Termination Advance Payment Bar Cases (Other Than IHL Training Type A or B)](#1016)  
[10.17  Delinquent Certification of Delivery and Follow-up Notice -Advance Payment Control Cases (IHL Type Training A or B)](#1017)  
  
**[Subchapter 2](#SII). Special Payments**  
[10.18  Criteria for Special Payment](#1018)  
[10.19  Enrollment Certification](#1019)  
[10.20  Processing the Special Payment](#1020)

 

**SUBCHAPTER I.  ADVANCE PAYMENTS**

**10.01  GENERAL**

---

An A/P (advance payment) is payable under the conditions described in [paragraph 10.02](#1002) below.  An A/P helps a claimant pay expenses at the time of registration.  A/P is not available for apprenticeship/on-the-job, correspondence or flight training.

**10.02  DEFINITION AND ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS**

---

**a.  Definition.**  An A/P is the amount payable for the initial month or fraction thereof in which the term begins plus the amount payable for the following month. 

**b.  Eligibility Requirements.**  Adjudication may process an A/P if all of the following apply: 

(1)  The claimant signs the A/P request on the enrollment certification.  A separate document requesting A/P, signed and dated by the claimant and attached to the enrollment certification, is also acceptable.

(2)  The school has certified to VA that it can satisfactorily carry out the A/P provisions of law ([38 U.S.C. 3680(d)(4)(B)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3680 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3680)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true)(formerly 1780).  Adjudication can determine from OLAF (On-Line Approval File) if A/P is payable at a school.

(3)  There are more than 30 days between terms and no interval payment will be paid.

(4)  The student is enrolled for at least half-time training. 

**c.  Timeliness Requirements**

(1)  VA must receive the enrollment certification with the A/P request at least 30 days, but not more than 120 days, in advance of the registration. 

(2)  A regional office may lower the 30-day limit if local conditions permit.  See paragraph 10.06 regarding the latest date for authorizing A/P awards. 

**10.03  ADVANCE PAYMENT NOT PAYABLE**

---

**a.  Advance Payment Request Does Not Meet Eligibility Requirements.**  If an A/P may not be honored because it does not meet one or more of the A/P requirements in [paragraph 10.02 b](#1002b) or [c](#1002c), take the following actions: 

(1)  Responsibilities of Veterans Services Division.  The ELR (Education Liaison Representative) will advise the school of the problem. 

(2)  Responsibilities of Adjudication Division 

(a)  Notify the claimant that regular payment will be made instead of A/P (the first check will be sent to the claimant, not to the school), and why. 

(b)  Either return the enrollment certification to the school for re submission to VA as a confirmed enrollment or hold it to be confirmed by telephone before award action.  Do not confirm chapter 30 awards.  See chapter 1 for the definition of a confirmed enrollment. 

(c)  For award preparation, see [paragraph 10.04c](#1004c) for processing a non-A/P award. 

**b.  Advance Payment Not Payable - Other Reasons**  

(1)  If the A/P is properly requested and timely received in VA, but for some reason cannot be processed in time for the A/P to be sent to the school, notify the claimant and the school that regular payment will be made instead of the A/P (the first check will be sent to the claimant, not to the school), and why. 

(2)  Except for chapter 30, confirm the enrollments by telephone before award action.  Chapter 30 requires monthly certifications; therefore, confirmation is not required.

**10.04  ADVANCE PAYMENT AWARD INFORMATION**

---

**a.  Name and Address Segment**  

(1)  The claimant's name must be shown on the first address line of the award and must not exceed 20 positions.  If any part of the name is entered on the second or third address line, that part of the name will be overlaid with the school's address and will not be shown on either the A/P check or on VA Form 22-1999V, Certification of Delivery of Advance Payment and Enrollment.  To prevent issuance of an A/P with an incomplete or missing name, awards must show a "reduced name" in the address segment.  A "reduced name" consists of the first initial, the second initial if a second initial is present and the surname.  Complete the award as follows: 

(a)  BDN (Benefit Delivery Network) 312/412/350 Education Award Screens.  For a BDN award, if an address change must be done to enter the reduced name, request the 601 Change of Address screen during CDAT/CADJ processing.  Change the address in the PIF (pending issue file) any time before the award is authorized to insure that the new address is part of the award transaction. 

(b)  VA Form 22-1997, Out-of-System Education Award.  If the name of record for out-of-system awards exceeds one address line, complete the name and address fields using the "reduced name" and address.  Check "YES" in the "new address" field so that personnel processing the manual award know to reflect the "reduced name."

(2)  If the claimant is receiving his or her benefits through a fiduciary, the school address will override the claimant's name.  Therefore, there would be no claimant's name, just a fiduciary's name on the A/P check and VA Form 22-1999V.  In this case, prepare an A/P special payment and award in accordance with paragraph [10.07](#1007) to include the claimant's name, the fiduciary's name, and the school's name and address. 

**b.  Advance Pay Reason Codes (BDN Awards)**

(1)  To have BDN pay an A/P, enter "0X" for original awards and "6X" for reentrance awards in the effective reason field on the award lines of the 312/412/350 screens.

(2)  Reason codes 0X and 6X also serve to have BDN set a control or a bar as indicated below for the confirmation of the award data. 

(a)  For IHL (Institution of Higher Learning) cases (type training A or B), BDN sets a control.  This control is called a COD (Certification of Delivery).  The control will not prevent issuance of subsequent benefits when due, except for chapter 30.  An operator in the chapter 30 system cannot even process a monthly certification without clearing the COD bar.

(b)  For other than IHL cases, a bar is set to ensure the return of VA Form 22-1999V on a timely basis.  The bar prevents issuance of benefits for subsequent periods until it is cleared. 

**c.  Advance Pay Reason Codes (Non-BDN Awards).**  Enter "0X" for original awards and "6X" for reentrance awards in the effective reason field on the award line entries of VA Form 22-1997 for out-of-system awards. 

(1)  Show any legend such as "CH 1606 - ADVANCE PAY" in the "remarks" space on VA Form 22-1997.  

(2)  To ensure that the finance activity has the full name and address (including ZIP code) of the school to which the A/P check should be mailed, include this information on VA Form 22-1997 in the "remarks."   

**d.  Awards for Advance Payment Not Payable.**  An A/P request which cannot be authorized before the enrollment effective date or fails to meet the eligibility requirements in [paragraph 10.02b](#1002b) will not be prepared for A/P.  This includes chapter 35 awards which have previously rejected and cannot be resubmitted before the effective date of the award. 

(1)  Except for chapter 30, contact the school, preferably by telephone, to confirm the enrollment. 

(2)  Prepare a special payment if conditions meet the criteria in [paragraph 10.18.](#1018) (See [par. 10.07](#1007) for BDN special payment procedures.)

(3)  Prepare a regular entrance or reentrance award (reason code 00 or 60).

**10.05  EARLIEST PROCESSING DATE FOR ADVANCE PAYMENT AWARD**

---

**a.** Do not process an A/P award more than 120 days before the effective date of the first enrollment period.  If an operator enters a chapter 32, 35, or 1606 BDN A/P award earlier than 120 days, BDN shows the message "ADV PYMT AND AWD DATA ARE INCONSISTENT".  If an operator enters a chapter 30 or 1606 BDN A/P award earlier than 120 days, BDN shows the message "EFF DATE MORE THAN 120 DAYS IN FUTURE". 

**b**.  Adequate liaison with schools should ensure that A/P enrollment certifications are not submitted more than 120 days before the commencement date.  However, schools should be encouraged to submit A/P enrollment certifications at least 30 days in advance of the commencement date. 

**10.06  LATEST PROCESSING DATE FOR ADVANCE PAYMENT AWARD** (See Policy Advisory dated 10/22/03)

---

**a.  Limitations to Processing Late Advance Payments**

(1)  During registration and the first few days of a term, a school may not have sufficient personnel to handle regional office requests for confirmation of unconfirmed enrollment certifications. 

(2)  Under such or similar circumstances, a regional office may authorize A/P awards (reason code 0X or 6X) for 10 days following the effective date of the award, in lieu of confirming the enrollment before authorizing a regular award.  (This confirmation requirement does not apply to chapter 30 awards.)  This 10-day deviation will be made only at the discretion of the regional office Director.  This does not preclude the requirement that an A/P special payment be authorized in these cases in accordance with paragraph [10.07a](#1007a) if the circumstances warrant special A/P.

**b.  Latest Date for Non-BDN Advance Payment.**  The latest date for the authorizer to sign an out-of-system award prepared on VA Form 22-1997 is 10 days after the effective date of an A/P award.  Awards signed by the authorizer after this date must be confirmed and not be prepared as A/P awards.  (This confirmation requirement does not apply to chapter 30 awards.)

**c.  Latest Date for BDN Processing of Advance Payment** 

(1)  BDN has an edit that prevents the authorization of an A/P award after 10 days following the effective date of the enrollment period, except for chapter 1606.  The 10-day rule should be followed for chapter 1606 to the extent allowed by the interim chapter 1606 system.

(2)  For a chapter 30 or 32 case, if the effective date is more than 10 days in the past, BDN changes the effective reason to 00 or 60.  The Remarks section shows the following message: CONFIRMATION OF ENROLLMENT REQUIRED, EFFECTIVE REASON CHANGE.  Confirm the claimant's enrollment with the school's certifying official before authorizing the award.

**10.07  SPECIAL PAYMENT FOR ADVANCE PAYMENT REQUEST**

---

**a**.  Regional offices may process one-time A/P special payments (transaction code 06G) in those cases in which an A/P has been properly requested in accordance with [paragraph 10.02b](#1002b) but BDN will not process the award in sufficient time for a check to be at the school when the claimant enrolls.  Use these procedures only when routine processing (see the schedule of operations for each benefit) will not timely deliver an A/P check.  **These procedures apply to chapters 32 and 35 only.**  There is no similar provision under chapters 30 and 1606.

*NOTE: The BDN HELP command, available only under chapter 35 (see* [Part 7: Chapter 2 - BDN Processing](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073682?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)*), may not be used to process an A/P special payment.  The system will not allow a special payment to be processed before the beginning date of the enrollment period using the HELP command.*

**b.** The name and address segment on the A/P special payment will be as follows. 

                                        NAME OF PAYEE

                                        NAME OF SCHOOL

                                        ADDRESS OF SCHOOL

                                        ADDRESS OF SCHOOL

                                        ADDRESS OF SCHOOL INCLUDING ZIP CODE

(1)  After the 06G transaction has processed, process the A/P award (beginning reason code 0X or 6X). 

(a)  An A/P check is not actually issued from the award action since an 06G transaction (special payment) establishes an accounts receivable in the master record. 

(b)  In chapter 35 cases, BDN does not issue a computer-generated letter since the A/P is applied to liquidate the accounts receivable.  However, to prevent BDN from issuing a NOE (Notice of Exception) with message code 581, EDUCATION LETTER NOT WRITTEN - RECORD CONTAINS A/R, code the A/P award to suppress the computer-generated letter.  Also send a dictated or form letter to the claimant.  See [paragraph 10.12.](#1012)

(c)  In chapter 32 cases, BDN issues a letter (see  M22-4, Part VI, Ch 6 [Letters](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073594?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)), but does not generate a NOE message.  Suppress the letter and send a dictated or form letter to the claimant.  See [paragraph 10.12](#1012).

(2)  For chapter 35 cases, BDN generates a NOE with message code 962, ADVANCE PAY APPLIED TO A/R - CONFIRM ENROLLMENT.  For chapter 32 cases, BDN generates a NOE message code 8040, A/P NOT PAID - CONFIRM ENROLLMENT.  Forward these NOE messages without the claims or DEA folders to VSD (Veterans Service Division) for confirmation of the enrollment. 

(a)  Upon receipt of these messages, VSD contacts the school, preferably by telephone, if an A/P bar exists (course not leading to a standard college degree), to confirm the enrollment.  Annotate the messages with the name and title of the school official, the date, and any changes in enrollment.  Also, sign and date the NOE message. 

(b)  If VSD secures verbal certification from the school's certifying official by telephone, the school official does not have to submit any additional written verification. 

(c)  At local option, forward these messages to another activity to secure confirmation from the school's certifying official.  After confirming the enrollment and any changes, forward the annotated messages to the appropriate activity as follows: 

i.  No Change.  Forward the NOE messages to Veterans Services Division or another activity to process a transaction 35A (CLEAR COD) using the CERT command in the BDN system.  Drop-file the NOE messages after processing the 35A transaction. 

ii.  Changes.  Forward the changes to Adjudication Division for further review and removal of the A/P bar or control.  Process the changes with or without the claims folder. 

**c**.  In those cases when a regular original or reentrance award must be processed in lieu of an A/P award, regular special payment procedures will be followed as outlined in paragraphs 10.18-10.20. 

**10.08  PROCESSING ADVANCE PAYMENT AWARD ON A CHAPTER 35 A-TYPE MASTER RECORD**

---

**a**.  If an operator processes an A/P award against an A-type (running) master record, BDN recycles the award until the current enrollment terminates. 

**b**.  BDN generates NOE message 544, TRANSACTION RECYCLED - NO M/R OR WRONG TYPE M/R.  No special action is required as the result of this message since it is informational only.  Since the award has not rejected, BDN removes the pending issue when the master file is updated. 

**c**.  When the current enrollment terminates and the master record becomes an E-type (terminated) record, BDN processes the award in the next cycle and updates the master record to show the A/P award. 

*NOTE:  The chapter 30, 32, and 1606 systems do not have a similar provision.  Operators must process A/P awards against a terminated master record.*

**10.09  ISSUANCE OF ADVANCE PAYMENT AWARD LETTER**

---

Upon processing of an A/P award, BDN sends a computer-generated letter to the claimant advising him or her of the action taken.  The letter also states that the A/P check is being sent to the school where the claimant may pick it up upon registration, but not more than 30 days before the commencement of the course.  BDN sends the computer-generated award letter when the award is processed, but the A/P check may not be issued for some time in the future.  To check the text of this letter or system limitations, consult the appropriate manual part.

**10.10  ISSUANCE OF ADVANCE PAYMENT CHECK**

---

**a**.  If the beginning date of the A/P award will be reached in 40 days, the award will be processed for payment by the Hines BDC (Benefit Delivery Center).  For chapter 1606, the timing of the release of the check is different.  (See [par. 10.13d.](#1013d))

**b**.  If the beginning date of the award is between 41 and 120 days from the processing date, BDN establishes the award as a future award to be updated and processed for payment when the beginning date becomes less than 41 days away. 

**c.**  When issued, the A/P check is made payable to the claimant.  The Treasury Disbursing Center mails the A/P check to the school in an individual check envelope. 

**d**.  BDN determines the address of the school to which the check will be mailed from the facility code in the individual's education master record. 

*NOTE:  The accuracy of the facility code on education awards cannot be emphasized enough.*

(1)  If the facility code fails to match an approved facility code, BDN sends the A/P check to the agent cashier at the regional office (to include RPOs (Regional Processing Offices)) that prepared the award. 

(a)  The agent cashier notifies the ELR that an A/P check has been received.  The ELR takes appropriate action to correct the facility code in the facility file.  The Adjudication Division takes appropriate action to correct the facility code in the claimant's education master record.  

(b)  The agent cashier is then informed of the name and address of the school to which the A/P check should be sent. 

(2)  The agent cashier sends the check and a VA Form 22-1999V to the proper school.

**e.**  Each benefit system issues A/Ps according to its own Schedule of Operations.  (See [Part 2 Chapter 1 - Computer Processing Concepts](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000078763?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) for the various schedules.)

**f.** After BDN processes the A/P award, resolve inquiries concerning the status of the A/P award by checking the M21 Education Master Record Status screen.  Resolve chapter 1606 inquiries by checking the 350, 351, and 352 screens.  If necessary, use the TINQ (Treasury Inquiry) command (see [Part 2: Chapter 8 - Miscellaneous Target Processing](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000072991?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)) to verify additional details.

(1)  For chapter 30, the last activity field is identified with "A/P".

(2)  For chapter 30, 32, and 35, the ADVANCE PAY field shows one of the following:

(a)  PENDING, if the award has been processed, but the check has not been issued; 

(b)  PAID, if the check has been issued; or

(c)  Blank or N/A, if no A/P award has been processed. 

(3)  The interim chapter 1606 system does not have a specific indicator to show A/P information.  To determine the status of an A/P, review the 350, 351 and 352 screens.  Review the following information:

(a)  Before release of the A/P check, an A/P shows as retroactive proceeds on the 352 screen. 

(b)  After the release of the A/P check, BDN shows it as a payment history.  The 350 and 351 screens show DLC (Date Last Certified) with the beginning date of the award.  These screens show DLP (Date Last Paid) as the day following the ending date of the A/P period.

EXAMPLE:  If the A/P check reflects payment from March 3, 1991, through April 30, 1991, BDN would show DLC as 03-03-91 and DLP as 05-01-91.

**10.11  ISSUANCE OF VA FORM 22-1999V**

---

For chapters 30, 32 and 35 awards processed on BDN, VA Form 22-1999V, is an 8 X 11 sheet with preprinted enrollment information.  For chapter 1606 BDN cases, BDN sends a letter with similar information to that contained on VA Form 22-1999V.  Both VA Form 22-1999V and the chapter 1606 letter are sent in a separate envelope from the A/P check.  See paragraph 10.12 for exceptions to issuance of VA Form 22-1999V when an accounts receivable is in a benefit record.  For chapter 1606 A/P awards sent to the Bufffalo regional office for processing, the Finance activity manually prepares VA Form 22-1999V and sends it to the school. 

**10.12  ADVANCE PAYMENT APPLIED TO ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE**

---

**a.  Chapter 30**

(1)  If all or part of the A/P check is applied to liquidate an existing accounts receivable, the chapter 30 system sends an award letter to the claimant.  This letter contains a paragraph stating that the account receivable is being withheld.  (See [Part 5: Chapter 7 - Letters](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000076317?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&))

(2)  If all of the chapter 30 A/P check is applied to liquidate an existing accounts receivable, the chapter 30 system does not send a COD to the school.  BDN generates NOE message 6070 stating VERIFY ENROLLMENT - COD NOT ISSUED - A/R EXCEEDS ADVANCE PAY.

**b.  Chapter 32**

(1)  If all or part of the A/P check is applied to liquidate an existing accounts receivable, the chapter 32 system sends an award letter to the claimant  This letter contains a paragraph stating that the account receivable is being withheld.  (See [Part 7: Chapter 6 - Letters](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073778?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)) 

(2)  For chapter 32 A/P awards, if an A/P check is applied to liquidate an existing accounts receivable, BDN does not issue a COD but issues NOE message 8040, ADVANCE PAYMENT APPLIED TO A/R - CONFIRM ENROLLMENT.

**c.  Chapter 35**  

(1)  If all or part of the A/P check is applied to liquidate an existing accounts receivable, BDN does not send a computer-generated letter.  Instead, BDN issues a NOE message with message code 581, EDUCATION LETTER NOT WRITTEN - RECORD CONTAINS A/R.  (See [par. 10.07b](#1007b) regarding suppression of this message for cases in which A/P special payments are authorized.) 

(2)  Upon receipt of this message, inform the claimant (if not already done at the time of award processing) that an A/P check will not be sent to the school since an overpayment exists in his or her account, or that a check for only the amount due after deduction for the overpayment will be sent. 

(3)  If an A/P check cannot be issued due to an overpayment, BDN does not issue a COD but issues a NOE with message code 962, ADVANCE PAYMENT APPLIED TO A/R - CONFIRM ENROLLMENT. 

**d.  Chapter 1606.**  If all or part of the A/P check is applied to liquidate an existing accounts receivable, the chapter 1606 system sends the computer-generated letter shown in [Part 8: Chapter 7 - Letters](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000075852?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&).  If an A/P check cannot be issued due to an overpayment, the interim chapter 1606 system, unlike the other systems, issues a COD but does not issue a NOE message.

**10.13  PROCESSING CHANGES TO MASTER RECORDS AFTER PROCESSING ADVANCE PAYMENT AWARD**

---

For chapter 30, 32, and 35 cases, it is imperative to remember that, if a change is made to an award after the A/P check has been issued and before DLP is reached, action to increase benefits may reset DLP to an earlier date and create an accounts receivable.  Whenever an accounts receivable is established, the debt collection process is initiated.  This can drastically affect payment of benefits.  This paragraph will show in detail how and when to process changes after the A/P award has been processed.  Please follow each procedure carefully and accurately and pay special attention to the amount of time allotted for processing the adjustment.  For chapter 1606 cases, see [subparagraph d](#1013d).

**a.  Award Adjustment - Not More Than 10 Days After Beginning Date (Chs. 30, 32, & 35)**

(1)  An amended or reentrance award may be processed after an A/P award has been processed if the processing period is between 120 days before and 10 days after the beginning date of the A/P award.  The award for the A/P period must be reentered as an A/P (0X or 6X) award. 

(2)  An award for increased benefits (e.g., adding a prior period of training) processed during this period will not affect DLP, the A/P control or bar, or the debt collection process.  An award to decrease benefits will activate the debt collection process but will not affect DLP or the A/P control or bar. 

**b.  Award Adjustment - 10 Days or More After Beginning Date But Before DLP (Chs. 30, 32, & 35).  Do not process** an amended or a reentrance award before DLP of an A/P award.  To do so will do two things: (1) remove the A/P control on an IHL award; and (2) create an erroneous account receivable by resetting DLP to an earlier date. 

(1)  Establish Pending Issue.  If an adjustment to a master record with an A/P award is received, establish an appropriate EPC (end product code) with a diary date equal to cycle 0 date (ch. 35), BIG PAY date (ch. 32) or FFP (Full-File Pass) date (ch. 30) of the DLP month. 

Example:  For chapter 35, if BDN shows a DLP of 1/1/91, the operator should enter a diary date as to when cycle 0, January, will run.  The operator would enter "12/16/90." 

(2)  Process Adjustment.  When the diary matures, the adjustment must be made within 5 workdays of the diary date. 

(a)  If the A/P control or bar is still set, confirm the enrollment before processing the award.  (See [par. 10.15.)](#1015)

(b)  Process the adjustment immediately. 

(c)  The short processing time is necessary to prevent delays in issuing increased benefits checks and to initiate the debt collection process as early as possible if benefits are decreased. 

**c.  Award Adjustment - After DLP (Chs. 30, 32, & 35).**  No special precautions need be taken to process adjustments to A/P awards after DLP except to confirm enrollment to lift the A/P control or bar.  Follow procedures for confirming enrollment in [paragraph 10.15](#1015).

**d.  Award Adjustments (Ch. 1606).**  Any adjustments to chapter 1606 A/P cases depend upon whether or not the A/P check has been released to the school.  For chapter 1606, the A/P will be issued by the BRP (Benefit Recurring Pay) run in the month before the beginning date of the award.  (See the schedule of operations for ch. 1606 as shown in [Part 2 Chapter 1 - Computer Processing Concepts](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000078763?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&))  Because of variations in beginning dates, the A/P check is usually issued approximately from 30 days before the effective date of the award until shortly after the effective date of the award.

(1)  Award Adjustments Before Release of Check.  Do not process any awards until the A/P check has been issued.  To do so would cause the pending A/P to be issued directly to the claimant and could cause duplicate payments.

(2)  Award Adjustments After Release of Check.  Once the A/P check is released, process any awards as necessary.  Unlike the other systems, processing an award in the interim chapter 1606 system does not affect the A/P control or bar.

**e.  Additional Monies to Payee.**  Any additional monies due the payee based on an amended award processed for a case either with a control or with a bar will be sent directly to the payee and not to the school.  If an accounts receivable exists, monies due will be applied toward reducing or liquidating the accounts receivable. 

**10.14  DELIVERY AND RETURN OF ADVANCE PAYMENT CHECK**

---

**a.**  The school is responsible for delivering the A/P check to the claimant when he or she registers (or not more than 30 days before the beginning of school if registration is earlier). 

**b.**  A returned A/P check (properly coded under returned check reason code 7) for chapters 32 and 35 results in the automatic termination of the enrollment including future periods in the claimant's master record.  BDN sends a computer termination letter to the claimant with a copy to the regional office for drop-filing.  (See ch. 7 of parts VI and VII for letter paragraphs for chs. 32 and 35 respectively.)  For chapters 30 and 1606, the returned check suspends the master record.  Adjudication must develop for the reason returned and adjust or terminate the award. 

**c.**  If a student enrolls in a school different from the one that submitted an A/P request with the enrollment certification and the award is terminated because of a returned A/P check, confirm the enrollment at the new school.  Process the enrollment at the new school for regular payment or special payment payable directly to the student if the criteria for special payment are met.  (See [par. 10.18.)](#1018) 

**10.15  RECEIPT OF CERTIFICATION OF DELIVERY AND CLEARING THE BAR OR CONTROL**

---

**a.  Receipt of Certification of Delivery.**  When the school delivers the A/P check to the claimant, the school official should immediately complete and return VA Form 22-1999V to the regional office or RPO.  In the event that the school has not yet received VA Form 22-1999V or the chapter 1606 generated letter with the same information (mailed separately from the check), the school certifying official may use VA Form 22-1999B, Notice of Change in Student Status--Institutional Courses Only, annotated "In lieu of certification of delivery - no change in enrollment and A/P check delivered" or "In lieu of certification of delivery - A/P check delivered." 

(1)  COD's for chapter 30 (awards prepared over BDN) will be returned to the RPO.

(2)  COD's for chapters 32, and 1606 (awards prepared over BDN) and for chapter 35 will be returned to the regional office. 

(3)  COD's for chapter 1606 out-of-system awards processed at the Buffalo regional office will be returned to the Buffalo regional office.

**b.  Clearing Bar or Control.**  Process all COD's for chapters 30, 32, 35 and 1606 and amended awards for chapter 35 using BDN, if possible.  For chapter 1606 A/P awards processed at the Buffalo regional office, prepare an out-of-system amended award on VA Form 22-1997 with the same wording. 

*NOTE:  Please remember that any adjustments, including ones shown on the COD, may not be processed before DLP.  (See [par. 10.13](#1013).)*

(1)  Use the CERT command to process COD's showing no change.  

(2)  Forward COD's showing any changes to the Adjudication Division for amended award processing.  (See [par. 10.13](#1013).)

**10.16  DELINQUENT CERTIFICATION OF DELIVERY AND AUTOMATIC TERMINATION - ADVANCE PAYMENT BAR CASES - (OTHER THAN IHL TRAINING TYPE A OR B)**

---

**a.  Chapter 30.**  BDN generates a delinquent certification of delivery letter to the claimant in the first month following the effective month of an NCD (NonCollege Degree) A/P award if the A/P bar is set.  If the COD has not been processed by the first of the second month, BDN automatically suspends the award with reason code 88.  If the COD has not been processed by the full-file pass of the third month, BDN issues a NOE message 6031 - DELINQUENT CERT OF DELIVERY - PROCESS STOP.  The RPO processes a stop payment with reason code 88 to terminate the award.  BDN generates an appropriate letter.  (See [Part 5: Chapter 6 - Certifications](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000077042?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), par. 6.10.)

**b.  Chapter 32.**  BDN generates a delinquent certification of delivery letter to the claimant in the first month following the effective month of an NCD A/P award if the A/P bar is set.  If the COD has not been processed by the first of the second month, BDN automatically terminates the award. 

**c.  Chapter 35**  

(1)  If neither the A/P check nor VA Form 22-1999V has been returned and processed by the special no-input cycle (see Schedule of Operations published monthly by Hines BDC (Benefit Delivery Center)) of the month following the month in which the A/P award began, BDN generates a letter to the claimant.  A copy will not be sent to the regional office.  The letter informs the claimant that he or she should ask the appropriate school official to send a confirmation of his or her enrollment to VA so that subsequent benefits are not delayed and so the award is not terminated.  (See [Part 7: Chapter 6 - Letters](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073778?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&))

(2)  If neither the A/P check nor VA Form 22-1999V is returned and processed by cycle 0 of the second month following the month in which the A/P award began, BDN does not pay the subsequent benefits. 

(a)  During the following cycle 1 of the same month, BDN sends three copies of COIN EDU 112, Listing of Accounts With Advance Pay Bar Set, to each regional office.  This list is in terminal-digit sequence for each separate facility or school.  When the regional office receives this list, one copy is sent to the Finance activity, one copy is sent to Adjudication, and one copy is sent to VSD. 

(b)  Using this list, regional offices can quickly ascertain whether a particular school has a concentration of delinquent CODs.  If there is such a concentration for a particular school, VSD will contact the school and assist in resolving any problems. 

(c)  Otherwise, the regional office must determine the status of each individual shown on the list.  If a school indicates that the forms have been lost or destroyed, use BDN to process the COD.  (See [par. 10.13](#1013) for adjusting A/P awards.)

(3)  If neither the A/P check nor VA Form 22-1999V is returned and processed by the special no-input cycle of the second month following the month in which the A/P award began, BDN automatically terminates the account effective the beginning date.  BDN sends a computer-generated notice to the claimant stating that termination action has been taken because no confirmation of enrollment was received from the school.  A copy of the letter is sent to the regional office for drop-filing. 

**d.  Chapter 1606.**  BDN generates a delinquent certification of delivery letter to the claimant in the first month following the effective month of an NCD A/P award if the A/P bar is set.  If the COD has not been processed by the first of the second month, BDN suspends the award.  Hines BDC includes the number on the COIN EDU 284, CH1606 Delinquent Certs of Delivery (COD).  (See [Part 8: Chapter 6 - Certifications](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000075851?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), par. 6.06b.)

**10.17  DELINQUENT CERTIFICATION OF DELIVERY AND FOLLOW-UP NOTICE - ADVANCE PAYMENT CONTROL CASES - (IHL TYPE TRAINING A OR B)**

---

**a.  Chapter 30**

(1)  The chapter 30 system does not release any further payments until a COD is received for an A/P. 

(2)  The chapter 30 system identifies those A/P cases which began the previous calendar month and for which a COD has not been processed and sends a Delinquent Certification of Delivery Letter. 

(3)  If a COD has not been processed by the FULL-File Pass of the next month, BDN suspends the case with suspend reason code 88. 

(4)  If a COD has not been processed by the FULL-File Pass of the next month, BDN issues NOE message 6031, DELINQUENT CERT OF DELIVERY - PROCESS STOP.  (See [Part 5: Chapter 6 - Certifications](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000077042?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)) 

**b.  Chapter 32**  

(1)  The following NOE messages are generated when a certification of delivery is not received for an IHL A/P: 

(a)  Message 1400, COD NOT RECEIVED/CONFIRM ENROLLMENT - generated 2nd month after the month of the A/P award. 

(b)  Message 1401, COD NOT RECEIVED/CONFIRM ENROLLMENT - generated 3rd month after the month of the A/P award. 

(c)  Message 1402, COD NOT RECEIVED/CONFIRM ENROLLMENT - generated 4 or more months after the month of the A/P award. 

(2)  Follow the procedures set forth for chapter 35 to confirm enrollments and to remove the control. 

**c.  Chapter 35**

(1)  If neither the A/P check nor VA Form 22-1999V is returned and processed by the special no-input cycle of the second month following the month in which the A/P award began, BDN generates a NOE with message code 935A, CERTIFICATE OF DELIVERY NOT RECEIVED - CONFIRM ENROLLMENT, with routing to VSD. 

(2)  If the control has not been cleared before the special no-input cycle of the next month, BDN generates a NOE with message code 935B. 

(3)  If the control has not been cleared before the special no-input cycle of the fourth month following the month in which the award began, BDN generates a NOE with message code 935C with routing to the Director.  BDN generates this message on a monthly basis until the control is cleared.  (It is not anticipated that a regional office should ever receive a message code 935C.)  In the event the school cannot locate the corresponding VA Form 22-1999V, annotate the NOE message in accordance with [paragraph 10.07b](#1007b), and forward it to VSD for processing a transaction 35A or to Adjudication Division for processing an amended award (transaction 14C).  See [paragraph 10.13](#1013) before processing an adjustment. 

(4)  BDN issues a NOE with message code 934, REENTRANCE AWARD LIFTED COD CONTROL - CONFIRM PURSUIT FROM        TO       , (with routing to VSD), when a reentrance award (transaction 12C) is processed against a record containing an A/P control for a prior period which has not been cleared. 

*NOTE:  Based on the instructions in [paragraph 10.13](#1013) for processing an adjustment to an A/P award, there should not be many of these messages.  Any award processed on an A/P award will have been processed after DLP and the enrollment should have been confirmed.*

(a)  Since this is a one-time message following complete removal of the computer control, it is most important that stations take priority action to confirm enrollment for the indicated period.  Ensure that confirmation is secured.  Maintain a local control, and if the local control is not cleared within 60 days, refer the matter to the regional office Director for definitive action. 

(b) If VSD obtains confirmation with no change in enrollment, annotate the message to this effect.  Sign, date, and route the annotated message for drop-filing.  If VSD obtains confirmation with a change in enrollment, annotate the message to this effect, route the annotated NOE message to the Adjudication Division for necessary action. 

**d.  Chapter 1606.**  The chapter 1606 system identifies those A/P cases for which 2 months have elapsed since the beginning of the A/P enrollment and for which a COD has not been processed.  BDN shows these cases on the COIN 284, Delinquent COD list.  (See [Part 8: Chapter 6 - Certifications](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000075851?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), par. 6.06b.)

 

**SUBCHAPTER II.  SPECIAL PAYMENTS**

**10.18  CRITERIA FOR SPECIAL PAYMENT**

---

**a.  Criteria.**  A special payment of education assistance allowance may be made only if special payment would provide significantly improved service over regular payment and one of the following conditions is met: 

(1)  Financial need is claimed.  The claimant may request the special payment based on financial need by written statement or by telephone request (documented on VA Form 119, Report of Contact);  

(2)  Payment has been delayed 2 or more months plus the stub month.    

**b.  System Limitations on Special Payment**  

(1)  Chapter 30.  A special payment of chapter 30 benefits may be made if the issue meets the requirements in subparagraph a.  However, there is no provision for special payment of chapter 30 benefits through BDN.  See paragraph 10.20 for special payment for a case processed manually.

(2)  Chapter 32.  A special payment of chapter 32 benefits may be made if the issue meets the requirements in subparagraph a.  Only the Finance activity can make the special payment using a fiscal transaction.

(3)  Chapter 35.  A special payment of chapter 35 benefits may be made if the issue meets the requirements in subparagraph a.  However, the special payment may be made by Finance activity or by Adjudication using the HELP command (see [Part 7: Chapter 2 - BDN Processing](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073682?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)).

(4)  Chapter 1606.  There is no provision for special payment in the interim chapter 1606 system. 

**10.19  ENROLLMENT CERTIFICATION**

---

An award may be prepared for special payment based on a properly completed enrollment certification with any required supporting material, or, except for flight training and correspondence courses, on the basis of a verbal certification. 

**a.  Verbal Certification**  

(1)  Verbal certification may be accepted if furnished by the school's certifying official to an individual authorized to prepare education authorizations or awards, to a Veterans Benefits Counselor, or to an Education Liaison Representative, or in the case of foreign schools, to a U.S. embassy or consulate.  The individual accepting the verbal certification is responsible for securing **complete** data before referring the claims, chapter 30, or DEA (Dependents' Educational Assistance) folder to the Adjudication Division for award action. 

(2)  If an award is authorized for special payment on the basis of a verbal certification, prepare a VA Form 119 to furnish the following information: 

(a)  Enrollment information; 

(b)  Dates of absences, if necessary; 

(c)  Monthly number of hours worked, if necessary; or

(d)  Other specifically required information such as 85-15 percent ratio requirement information. 

(e)  In addition, request the certifying official to submit written documentation which will serve as a record purpose confirmation of the verbally obtained data. 

(3)  Establish an appropriate EPC in the 200 series to ensure receipt of this supporting information.  Take the EPC when the information is received or for retroactive termination. 

(4)  If the supporting information is not received at the expiration of the 30-day control, inform the claimant.  Give the claimant 30 additional days to obtain and submit the required documentation.  If the information is not received by the end of the additional 30 day period, terminate the award retroactively to the date of inception. 

**b.  Apprenticeship and Other OJT (On-the-Job Training) Certifications.**  For apprenticeship and other OJT, the certifying official must verify that a training agreement has, in fact, been negotiated if it is not of record. 

(1)  In addition, request the certifying official to submit a copy of the training agreement as soon as possible, and in no event later than 30 days from the date that he or she furnishes the verbal confirmation. 

(2)  Establish an appropriate EPC in the 200 series to insure receipt of this supporting information.  Take the EPC when the information is received or for retroactive termination. 

(3)  If it is not received at the expiration of the 30-day period, so inform the claimant.  Give him or her an additional 30 days in which to submit the required documentation.  If the documentation is not received by then, terminate the award retroactively to the date of inception. 

**c.  Flight or Correspondence Certifications.**  If an award is authorized for special payment of flight or correspondence benefits, it must be based on a properly completed enrollment certification with the required supporting material (number of lessons or flight training completed).  Set up an appropriate EPC in the 200 series for receipt of the necessary documentation. 

**10.20  PROCESSING THE SPECIAL PAYMENT**

---

A special payment request must meet the requirements of [paragraph 10.18](#1018).  Show the basis for the special payment on the award.  A request for special payment may be made by any adjudicator or education claims clerk and must be authorized by a senior adjudicator or higher authority.  Procedures for processing the special payment follow:

**a.  Chapter 30.**  There is no provision for special payment through BDN.  When the requirements for special payment in [paragraph 10.18](#1018) are met for a case processed manually, annotate the out-of-system award on VA Form 22-1997 in red to show "SPECIAL PAYMENT NEEDED."  Send the chapter 30 folder and the award to the Finance Activity.

**b.  Chapter 32.**  Special payments may be done for chapter 32 cases to be processed in BDN through submission of a fiscal transaction (04G and 06G) by the Finance activity.  Special payments, as a rule, should not be needed if the award can be processed over BDN because of the overnight update of the chapter 32 master record.  However, if the award will not process over BDN immediately, but will in the future, (e.g., unapplied contributions to be resolved by the service department), a special payment may be processed if the special payment requirements of [paragraph 10.18](#1018) are met.  Prepare an Optional Form 41, Routing and Transmittal Slip, requesting that Finance activity prepare a special payment.  Attach it to the claims folder and forward it to the Finance activity. 

**c.  Chapter 35.**  There are two methods of preparing special payments for chapter 35 cases: 

(1)  Out-of-System Cases 

(a)  Use VA Form 22-1997, Education Award.

(b)  Complete certification information regarding hours worked or lessons completed must also accompany the award, if required. 

(c)  Refer the award with the claims or DEA folder to the Finance activity by the most expedient means available. 

(2)  Cases To Be Processed in BDN.  Special payments may be done for chapter 35 cases to be processed on BDN through the use of the HELP command.  BDN special payments are limited to IHL, NCD, farm cooperative, OJT/apprenticeship and cooperative training.  (See [Part 7: Chapter 2 - BDN Processing](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073682?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)) for special payment procedures.)