# Part 7: Chapter 7 - VA Education Loans PROGRAM REPEALED See CIR. 22-04-01, PARAGRAPH 9

**Part 7: Chapter 7 - VA Education Loans PROGRAM REPEALED See CIR. 22-04-01, PARAGRAPH 9**

[7.01  General](#701)  
[7.02  Application for Loan](#702)  
[7.03  Eligibility - Basic Criteria](#703)  
[7.04  Eligibility - Financial Criteria](#704)  
[7.05  Waiver of 6-Month Requirement for NCD Courses](#705)  
[7.06  Loan Amount](#706)  
[7.07  Loan Denial](#707)  
[7.08  Loan Approval](#708)  
[7.09  Disclosure Requirements](#709)  
[7.10  Two-Signature Requirement](#710)  
[7.11  End Product Code](#711)  
[7.12  Notice of Procedural and Appellate Rights](#712)  
[7.13  Payment of Loan](#713)  
[7.14  Repayment of Loan](#714)  
[7.15  Loan Status Indicator](#715)  
[7.16  School Financial Aid Officer's Responsibilities](#716)  
[7.17  Liaison With School Financial Aid Officers](#717)  
  
**Figures**  
[7.01  Table of Annual Percentage Rates Before Repayment](#f701)  
[7.02  Table of Annual Percentage Rates During Repayment](#f702)

 

**7.01  GENERAL**

---

**a.**  Education loans are available for spouses and surviving spouses under chapter 35 who are beyond their delimiting period.  Loans were also available to a limited extent under chapter 34 for training which occurred before January 1, 1992.

**b.**  VA's (Veteran Administration's) education loan program was initiated on January 1, 1975.  The program was enacted to provide an additional source of financial aid to students enrolled at high cost educational institutions. 

**c**.  Major changes have been made to the education loan program since its inception.  A chronological listing of some of the more significant provisions and amendments is provided below: 

(1)  [January 1, 1975 (Public Law 93-508)](https://www.congress.gov/bill/93rd-congress/house-bill/12628)

(i)  Maximum loan amounts for various periods of enrollment were originally established as: 

A.  $200 for a quarter or a summer term. 

B.  $300 for a semester.  *(NOTE:  Any semester of fewer than 15 weeks is treated as a quarter for education loan purposes.)*

*C.  $600 for an academic year.*

*D.  $800 for an academic year plus the following summer term.*

*E.  $400 for a 6-month portion of a course which is not operated on a term basis.*

(ii)  Students must have applied for and been denied a loan under the Guaranteed Student Loan Program. 

(iii)  Loans could not be made, without exception, for any NCD (Non-College Degree) course requiring less than 6 months of full-        time training. 

(iv)  Loans could not be made for any summer term less than 10 weeks in length (VA administrative provision). 

(v)  The maximum period for which any particular loan could be granted was 12 months (VA administrative provision). 

(2)  October 1, 1976 ([Public Law 94-502](https://www.congress.gov/bill/94th-congress/senate-bill/969)).  Maximum loan amounts according to enrollment periods were increased to: 

(i)  $500 for a quarter or summer term. 

(ii)  $750 for a semester. 

(iii)  $1,500 for an academic year. 

(iv)  $2,000 for an academic year plus summer term. 

(v)  $1,000 for a 6-month portion of a course not operated on a term basis.

(3)  January 1, 1978 ([Public Law 95-202](https://www.congress.gov/bill/95th-congress/house-bill/8701))

(i)  Maximum loan amounts were again increased to: 

A.  $830 for a quarter or a summer term. 

B.  $1,250 for a semester. 

C.  $2,500 for an academic year. 

D.  $3,330 for an academic year plus summer term. 

E.  $1,660 for a 6-month portion of a course not operated on a term basis. 

(ii)  Students no longer had to have applied for and been denied a loan under the Guaranteed Student Loan Program. 

(iii)  A waiver of the minimum 6-month course length requirement for NCD courses was provided.  (See [par. 7.05](#705).) 

(iv)  Provisions were added for the approval of an education loan during the 2-year period following the delimiting date for educational assistance benefits.

(4)  August 1, 1978 (Administrative changes made by VA in response to increasingly unfavorable default rates on matured education loans.

(i)  The maximum periods for which any particular loan could be granted were limited to: 

A.  One semester. 

B.  A summer term. 

C.  Two quarters. 

D.  A 6-month portion of any NCD course not operated on a term basis. 

(ii)  The minimum length of a summer term was reduced to 8 weeks for education loan purposes. 

(iii)  A provision was added to prohibit the approval of an education loan to any student who has outstanding indebtedness to VA     because of a prior overpayment of benefits. 

(5)  March 7, 1980 ([38 CFR 21.4501](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14501)).  A high-cost institution was defined as one at which the charges for tuition and fees are at least  $700, based on full-time attendance, for the school year. Students attending institutions with lower charges were made ineligible for education loans within their delimiting periods for educational assistance benefits. 

(6)  October 1, 1980 ([Public Law 96-466](https://www.congress.gov/bill/96th-congress/house-bill/5288)).  Basic eligibility to an education loan was extended to students pursuing a program of vocational flight training, provided that a student was entitled to VA reimbursement of flight training charges at the rate of 60 percent of charges incurred. 

(7)  October 1, 1981 ([Public Law 97-35](https://www.congress.gov/bill/97th-congress/house-bill/3982))

(i)  The education loan program was repealed for trainees under chapter 32, and for sons and daughters under chapter 35. 

(ii)  Basic eligibility to education loans was terminated for students under chapters 34 and 35 who were still within their delimiting       periods for educational assistance benefits, except for veterans and servicepersons under chapter 34 pursuing courses of vocational flight training at a 60 percent reimbursement rate.  (NOTE: Public Law 97-35 also repealed 38 U.S.C. 1677 and prohibited the commencement of a program of flight training after September 30, 1981. Persons who were already enrolled in a flight training program as of August 31, 1981, were permitted to continue in training provided that enrollment remained continuous.) 

(iii)  Provisions for post-delimiting date education loans to veterans under chapter 34, and to spouses and surviving spouses under chapter 35 were not amended.

**d**.  The law prohibits education loans for programs of correspondence, high school, apprenticeship or other on-the-job training.  In addition, students enrolled in institutions not located in a state (as defined in 38 CFR 21.1021(c)) are not eligible for education loans. 

**e**.  No loan will be authorized to any eligible veteran or person who has defaulted on a previous VA education loan if there is an unliquidated balance still owed to VA ([38 CFR 21.4501(d)(2)).](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14501)

*NOTE:  A second education loan can be authorized if the eligible person defaulted on a prior education loan, had that previous education loan cleared by bankruptcy proceedings and had entitlement charged for the unliquidated balance of that previous education loan.*

**f.** The rate at which a student pursues training is significant in terms of both establishing eligibility to an education loan and determining when repayment of a loan must begin.  Training time for resident institutional courses will be determined in accordance with [38 CFR](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14270) [21.4270](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14270) through [21.4274.](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14274)

**g**.  Before a loan payment may be released, the student must execute VA Form 22-8726, Promissory Note (Veterans or Eligible Persons Education Loan Program), which provides for repayment of principal and interest.  Repayment of both principal and interest is deferred during any period the student is enrolled in training and attending on at least a 1/2 time basis. 

**h**.  A loan fee not to exceed 3 percent will be withheld from the approved loan amount for each eligible claimant to provide a fund to insure against defaults made under the loan program. 

**7.02  APPLICATION FOR LOAN**

---

**a.  Form.**  The application form for an education loan is VA Form 22-8725, Application for Education Loan.  The application requests a statement of financial resources, educational costs, enrollment data, etc.  A separate loan application is required for each semester and for each summer term.  Because of the relative brevity of quarters, applications will be accepted for enrollment periods of two consecutive quarters of a school year. Loans to students attending courses not operating on a term basis will require a separate application for each 6-month (or shorter) portion of the enrollment. 

**b.  Enrollment Period.**  The applicant must indicate the enrollment period for which the loan is requested.  Education costs for that     period only, along with financial resources based on that period, will be used to determine the loan amount to be authorized. The establishment of maximum enrollment periods insures that loans are approved only for students who are satisfactorily pursuing their educational programs and who need additional financial assistance to remain in school. 

**c.  Time of Receipt of Application**

(1)  If the application is received on or after the enrollment date and the student's actual attendance has been confirmed, eligibility for the loan will be approved or denied, as appropriate. 

(2)  If the application is received up to 30 days before the beginning of the enrollment period or before confirmation of actual attendance, loan eligibility may be tentatively approved or denied.  If the loan is tentatively approved, additional processing will be required to confirm attendance as described in [paragraph 7.08c.](#708c)  Loan applications received more than 30 days before the beginning of the loan period will be denied based on premature submission. 

(3)  If the application is received after the period to which the loan will apply, it will be denied.  If the application is for two consecutive quarters, but the first quarter has ended and the second quarter has not ended, the loan will apply only to the second quarter. 

**7.03  ELIGIBILITY - BASIC CRITERIA**

---

Education loans may be granted for a maximum of 2 years after a veteran's (chapter 34 only), spouse's, or surviving spouse's delimiting date.  The following criteria must be met: 

**a**.  The student has unused entitlement after the expiration of his or her delimiting date;

**b**.  The student must be enrolled full time in the same program of education during the loan period that he or she was enrolled in on the date that his or her delimiting date occurred; and

**c**.  The student was enrolled full time: 

(1)  On the date that his or her delimiting date occurred, or

(2) On the last date of the term immediately preceding his or her delimiting date, if that date occurred during a school break or summer term.  Enrollment in a summer term is not required. 

d.  The student must not have an outstanding indebtedness to VA because of a prior overpayment of benefits.

e.  Unused entitlement may be used to establish loan eligibility until the earliest of the following: 

(1)  Until 2 years from the student's delimiting date; or

(2)  Until unused entitlement used to establish loan eligibility has been exhausted (entitlement is used at the rate of 1 month for each month of entitlement that would have been used had the veteran, spouse, or surviving spouse been in receipt of educational assistance); or

(3)  Until the approved program of education in which enrolled on the delimiting date is completed.  (Normal progression will be permitted.) 

f.  Once qualified for an education loan after the delimiting date, the student is not required to remain enrolled continuously or be in full-time training to be qualified for a subsequent loan which follows a loan made for a period after the delimiting date.  For example, a student who received a loan after his or her delimiting date for the fall semester of the 1991-1992 school year would be eligible for a loan for full-time attendance in the same program for the fall semester of the 1992-1993 school year even though there was an intervening summer session or semester during which the student was not enrolled or was enrolled at less than full time. 

*NOTE:  Chapter 34 veterans WHOSE ELIGIBILITY TERMINATED ON DECEMBER 31, 1989, are not eligible for an education loan.  Chapter 34 veterans WITH INDIVIDUAL DELIMITING DATES BEFORE DECEMBER 31, 1989, are eligible for a post-delimiting date education loan, subject to the other qualifications stated above.  These veterans qualify for a post-delimiting date education loan for two years after their delimiting date.  Chapter 34 veterans cannot qualify for a post-delimiting date education loan for training which occurs after December 31, 1991.*

**7.04  ELIGIBILITY - FINANCIAL CRITERIA**

---

The veteran or eligible person must have school-related expenses which exceed his or her available financial resources.  Loans may be granted in an amount equal to the amount by which school-related expenses exceed available resources, but not to exceed a rate of $1,250 for one semester, $1,660 for two quarters, or $270 per month for courses not operated on a term basis. 

**a.  Available Resources.**  All financial resources must be reported by the applicant in the following categories: 

(1)  Non-VA Financial Assistance.  The applicant must list all non-VA financial assistance as indicated on VA Form 22-8725.  Such financial assistance includes, but is not limited to, Federal Insured Student Loans (Guaranteed Student Loans, Health Education Assistance Loans, etc.), National Direct Student Loans, Pell Grants, Supplemental Education Opportunity Grants, College Work-Study (non-VA), and any other grants, fellowships, scholarships, and loans.  The amounts of these resources applied for will be considered available to the student and will be included in the student's resources unless the student's application for a specific resource has been disapproved. 

(2)  Family Contributions.  The student must report all cash contributions made toward his or her educational and living expenses by the student's family or spouse.

(3)  Cash Assets.  Such assets include, but are not limited to, cash on hand, amounts held in checking and saving accounts, certificates of deposit, negotiable stocks and bonds, and any other liquid assets available to the student.  Assets reported as non-VA financial assistance, family contributions, and current year net available taxable and nontaxable income will not be included in cash assets to prevent the double counting of resources. 

(4)  Estimated Current Year Net Available Income.  The applicant must report only that income which applies to him or her.  The year in which the loan application is submitted will be the "base" year to be used for reporting income although the loan period may be in another year. 

(i)  Estimated current year net available taxable income will be derived from the adjusted gross income (wages, salary, dividends, interest, rental business, etc.) for the student only, less: 

A.  Authorized deductions for exemptions.  Verify the current rate per exemption with the IRS (Internal Revenue Service) or from federal income tax information.

B.  Itemized or standard deduction, whichever is greater.  Verify the current standard deduction which may be deducted with the IRS or federal income tax information.

C.  Mandatory withholdings such as federal and state income taxes, social security, and other mandatory deductions. 

(ii)  Current year nontaxable income will include income sources such as VA compensation and pension, disability retirement, unemployment compensation, welfare payments, and social security benefits. 

(iii)  The income amounts obtained in subparagraphs (a) and (b) above will be added to obtain the total current year income.  This amount will then be multiplied by the appropriate factor according to the loan period as follows: 

| **1. Course organized on a term basis:** | | | **2. Course not organized on a term basis**: | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **Period to Which     Loan Will Apply** | **Factor by Which  Income Multiplied** | | **Period to Which     Loan Will Apply** | **Factor by Which  Income Multiplied** | |
| 1 Semester | .375 | | 1-3 months | .25 | |
| 1 Quarter | .25 | | 4-5 months | .375 | |
| 1 Summer Term | .25 | | 6 months | .50 | |
| 2 Quarters | .50 | |  |  | |
| ***NOTE:  These factors were previously in M22-2, part IV, chapter 14.*** | | | | | |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |

**b.  Allowable Expenses.**  Only those school-related expenses that are attributable to the student will be included under Costs and Enrollment Data on the application.  Expenses for dependents will not be included. 

(1)  Books and Supplies.  Books and supplies are an allowable expense only when required for all similarly enrolled students.  Books and supplies in excess of $200 per semester, $133 per quarter, or $266 per other enrollment period (6 months in length) will require substantiation.  Specific development for verification will be undertaken if necessary. 

*NOTE:  A school usually publishes a list of books and supplies necessary for a course.  These books can be considered as required for that course.  Other books and supplies such as study guides not shown on such a list are considered optional and are not an allowable expense.*

(2)  Noninstitutional Room and Board.  This expense may be included if the student is a commuting student.  The allowable expense may not exceed the room and board charges at the school; or

(i)  If the school does not provide room and board, the noninstitutional room and board charges may not exceed the room and board charges at the nearest state university or state college providing room and board.  The school's financial aid officer will provide this information, if known.  If an application is received without room and board information, it will be determined from the current school catalog.  The room and board charges will be entered and initialed by the adjudicator or education clerk on the application along with the name of the school selected. 

(ii)  A student living off campus may list rent, utilities, and food.  Utilities may include water and sewage, trash collection, gas or fuel oil, and electricity.  When living arrangements are shared with others (including spouse or other dependents), only the student's prorated share will be included. These expenses or the school's charges (or the charges at the nearest state university or college) for room and board, whichever is less, will be allowed. 

(3)  Commuting Expenses.  Commuting expenses are the actual costs of commuting from the student's residence to the school, not to exceed 22.5 cents per mile.  The daily commuting expense may not exceed the expense that would result from a 110-mile round trip (55 miles one way). Although the maximum allowable commuting expense is $24.75 (110 miles x $0.225) for each day of classes, allow only the actual cost of commuting, not to exceed the 22.5-cents-per-mile limitation.  For example, if a student lives 5 miles from school, the maximum allowable commuting expense for each day of classes is $2.25 (10 miles x $0.225).  If the same student takes the subway at $2.00 per round trip, the maximum allowable commuting expenses would be $2.00 for each day of classes (this figure is less that the $2.25 maximum allowance for 10 miles).

(4)  Other School-Related Expenses. Other expenses that may be considered are the student's health insurance and miscellaneous school-related expenses such as typing of research papers.  Expenses paid to the school such as tuition and fees, and room and board are listed by the school on the application. 

**c.  Excluded Expenses.**  The following are examples of expenses specifically excluded from consideration as allowable expenses: 

(1)  Living expenses of dependents.  (Deductions for dependents have been made from the available resources.) 

(2)  Debts, both legal and personal.  (Includes installment sales contracts, as well as revolving charge accounts and bank credit cards.) 

(3)  Car payments, car insurance, car repairs, and other related car expenses.  (These items have been provided for in the 22.5 cents-per-mile allowance.) 

(4)  Life insurance premiums. 

(5)  Home improvements. 

(6)  Recreation and entertainment. 

(7)  Charitable donations. 

(8)  Legal fees. 

(9)  Court fines and costs. 

(10)  Dependent's tuition. 

(11)  Gifts. 

**d.  Verifying Financial Resources.**  The applicant may be requested to submit a copy of his or her federal income tax return if it is needed to process the loan application.  However, such a request should not be considered a routine practice.

(1)  Copies of federal income tax returns will be requested only if income information for the preceding year will assist in making a determination of eligibility for an education loan.  A copy of a federal income tax return may be of assistance if, for example, a veteran reports little or no net available taxable income for the current year and is enrolled in a high-cost program.  If the applicant had a substantial income for the prior year, as shown on the federal income tax return, further development would be appropriate to establish a more accurate estimate of net available taxable income for the current year.

(2)  If the applicant is unable to produce or will not consent to furnish a copy of his or her tax return, if needed, he or she may provide instead other credible independent financial evidence.

(3)  If the applicant fails to furnish financial information as described above when requested, the loan application may be denied for failure to furnish evidence.  Advise the claimant of the denial and give full appellate rights.

(4)  Tax returns (and accompanying information) are made confidential by 26 U.S.C. 6103 and the Privacy Act.  No disclosure of such information will be made outside VA except as permitted by law.  The District Counsel should be consulted before such information is disclosed outside VA to anyone other than the taxpayer without his or her written request for, or consent to such disclosure.

**7.05  WAIVER OF 6-MONTH REQUIREMENT FOR NCD COURSES**

---

**a**.  Applications for education loans from veterans or eligible persons attending NCD courses which require less than 6 months to complete will be denied unless a waiver has been granted by VA.  A waiver may be granted if it is determined that it would be in the interest of the student and the federal government.  The applicant will be given the reasons for disapproval by dictated letter and informed that a waiver of the 6-month requirement may be requested by the school. 

(1)  The SAA (State approving agency) determines the length of a course as part of the approval of that course.  The ELR (Education Liaison Representative) enters the course information, to include the course length, into OLAF (On-Line Approval File) or on VA Form 22-1998b (Approval Information - Nondegree Program & Nonaccredited Degree Program).  If a waiver of the 6-month requirement is granted, the ELR enters this information into the remarks section of OLAF or VA Form 22-1998b.

(2)  The adjudicator should review OLAF or VA Form 22-1998b.  If OLAF or VA Form 22-1998b shows that the course is less than 6 months in length, the adjudicator should review the remarks section to determine whether a previous waiver of the 6-month requirement for loan purposes has been granted.  Unless OLAF or VA Form 22-1998b shows that a waiver has been granted, the adjudicator will disapprove the application as stated above.  Once a school has had a waiver approved by the Director of the regional office for a course, it will not be necessary for the school to submit additional evidence for subsequent loans for the same course unless requested by VA.  VA should only request this clarifying evidence if there is a material change in the approval.

*NOTE:  "Course," as used in this context, refers to the individual course a student may pursue, (e.g., certificate course in welding).*

(3)  If a school is unable to submit evidence to establish that the course meets the 6-month requirement, a waiver of this requirement will be necessary before a loan can be considered. 

**b**.  A school may apply for a waiver to the Director of the regional office that has jurisdiction of the area where the school is located. The application must be accompanied by an affidavit signed by the president, owner, or chief official of the school.  The affidavit must certify all of the following: 

(1)  The percentage of students, whose enrollment ended during the past 2 years, who completed the course.

(2)  The percentage of all students (no exclusions for any reason) completing the course over the past 2 years who obtained employment in the occupational category for which the course was designed to provide training or in a closely related occupation.

(3)  The percentage of all students currently enrolled in the school who receive VA educational benefits; and

(4)  The default rate under any Department of Education loan program if students at the school have been eligible for and have been granted such loans.  If loans have been granted under a loan program, the school must submit, with this certification, a statement signed by a Department of Education official verifying the default rate. 

**c**.  The Director of the regional office shall review waiver requests to determine if they meet all of the following requirements: 

(1)  The course completion rate must be 75 percent or more for the preceding 2 years. 

(2)  During the preceding 2 years, 75 percent or more of the graduates of the course must have gained employment in the occupation for  which trained or in a closely related occupation.

(3)  The course must require at least 3 months to complete. 

(4)  An institutional course must be approved for full-time attendance only.

(5)  The percentage of all students currently enrolled in the school receiving VA educational benefits must not exceed 35 percent. 

(6)  The cumulative default experience on all VA education loans made at the school must not exceed 5 percent or five cases, whichever is greater.  This may be determined from the station's current RCS 04-0468, VA Education Loan Payment/Default Report. The number of total defaults are divided by the total loans disbursed. 

(7)  The cumulative default experience on Department of Education loans must not exceed 5 percent or five cases, whichever is greater. Refer to the school affidavit and Department of Education statement. 

(8)  There must have been no serious discrepancies discovered at the school by the SAA on supervisory visits or VA on compliance surveys during the previous 2 years. 

**d**.  The application for waiver, other related information, and any decision based on the application will be made a part of the approval folder. 

**e**.  If the above requirements have not been met, the regional office Director is authorized to deny requests for waiver.  The denial letter to the school will state the reason for denial and advise the school that it may request an administrative review of the decision by Central Office within 1 year from the date of the denial letter.  A copy of the denial letter shall be filed in the approval folder.  Such a request for review should be made to the regional office. If a request for review is received, the complete record, including the approval folder and compliance survey file, will be sent to the Program Administration Staff (225B) in Central Office for review and decision.  The regional office shall notify the school by letter when the record is forwarded to Central Office.  The Central Office decision will be sent to the regional office Director for written notice to the school. 

**f.** If the requirements of subparagraph c above have been met, the waiver request shall be forwarded to Central Office.  The complete record, including the approval folder and compliance survey file, will be sent to the Program Administration Staff (225B) for review and decision. The regional office will notify the school by letter when the record is forwarded to Central Office.  The Central Office decision will be sent to the regional office Director for written notice to the school.  If a waiver is granted, the ELR must update OLAF or VA Form 22-1998b and give appropriate notice to the Authorization activity. 

**7.06  LOAN AMOUNT**

---

**a.  Determining Loan Amount.**  To determine the amount of the loan, VA Form 22-8727, Education Loan Worksheet, will be used. The lesser of the following amounts will be the amount of the loan: 

*NOTE:  The November 1989 version of VA Form 22-8727 contains invalid references to items on the June 1990 version of VA Form 22-8725.  Ignore these references.*

(1)  Amount Needed.  The amount of loan needed will be determined by subtracting the available resources from the actual cost of attendance to obtain the net amount by which costs exceed the resources available for education needs. 

(2)  Maximum Loan Amounts for Enrollment Periods.  Although the cumulative total of loans that a student may receive during an academic year is $2,500, each individual loan is limited to the following enrollment periods and the corresponding maximum loan amounts: 

| **(a)  Courses organized on a term basis:** | | **(b)  Courses not organized on a term basis:** | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **Period** | **Maximum** | **Length of Course** | **Maximum** |
|  |  |  |  |
| Semester | $1,250 | 3 through 5 months | $270 per month |
| Quarter | 830 | 6 months | $1,660 |
| 2 Quarters | 1,660 |  |  |
| Summer Session | 830 |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
| *NOTE:  No loan will be made for a course of less than 3 full months in length.  (The loan period itself may be less than 3 months.)  Above 3 full months, 15 or more calendar days will be rounded to the next higher month.  Fewer than 15 days will be dropped.* | | | |

(3)  Absolute Maximum.  The loan amount may not exceed the amount obtained by multiplying the number of months of remaining entitlement times $376.

(4)  Amount of Loan Requested.  This is the amount requested by the student on the application. 

**b.  Approved Loan Amount.**  The approved loan amount will be the lesser of the amounts discussed in subparagraph a above. The amount obtained will be rounded upward to the nearest $10 when a loan is approved for less than the maximum amount.  A loan will not be approved for an amount less than $50. 

**7.07  LOAN DENIAL**

---

**a**.  If the applicant is not eligible for a loan, he or she will be notified of the denial on Form Letter 22-892, Disallowance Letter - Education Loan, or by dictated letter indicating the reason for denial.  Notification of procedural and appellate rights must be provided. 

**b**.  An incomplete application is not a proper basis for denial and should be developed for necessary information.  Denial for failure to furnish requested information is proper only after the request has been made and the information is not timely furnished (30 days from the date of request for additional information).  (See pt. IV, par. 13.18, concerning due process requirements.).

**7.08  LOAN APPROVAL**

---

**a.  Preparation of Promissory Note.**  VA Form 22-8726 will be completed by Adjudication personnel. 

(1)  Typewritten entries in the top half of the form include: 

(i)  The name and file number of the eligible veteran or person in the blocks at the top of the form. 

(ii)  The name of the eligible veteran or person, the full amount of the approved loan, and the interest rate, in the first sentence. 

A.  If the loan indicator on the M24 screen is D - DEFAULTED, contact the Finance activity to ascertain whether the defaulted loan has been repaid in full.  If any amount is still owed on a previously defaulted loan, the current loan application will be denied. 

B.  Call the Program Administration Staff (225B) of the Education Service at [(202) 273-7187] for the current interest rate.  Also see the NOTE in paragraph [7.09(b)](#709b).

(iii)  Check paragraph IIIb for all education loans.

(2)  In the lower portion of VA Form 22-8726, the adjudicator must check the appropriate block to indicate to the student (and subsequently the Finance activity) where the check will be mailed.  The adjudicator must check that the student's education loan check will be mailed to "IN CARE OF YOUR SCHOOL AT THE ADDRESS INDICATED BELOW" or to "TO THE CURRENT ADDRESS YOU INDICATE BELOW."

(a)  First, determine whether or not the school has chosen to deliver loan payments checks to students.  The adjudicator should contact the ELR for this information.  (If a school chooses to deliver (or not deliver) loan payment checks to students, or if the school or the ELR determines that the school cannot satisfactorily care for and deliver the loan payment checks, the ELR should have this information in the approval file.)

(b)  If the ELR certifies that a school does not choose to deliver loan payment checks to students, that the school cannot satisfactorily care for and deliver the loan payment checks, or does not indicate any information concerning education loan payment checks, the adjudicator should indicate that the education loan check will be mailed to the student. 

(c)  If the ELR certifies that a school can receive education loans, the adjudicator should indicate that the education loan check will be mailed to in care of the school.  The name and address of the school will be completed as follows: 

SCHOOL NAME  
FOR (STUDENT'S NAME)  
SCHOOL ADDRESS

The address of the school will be the official school address that is maintained in the approval file. 

**b.  Application Received On or After Enrollment Date.**  The veteran or eligible person will be sent a Form Letter 22-891, Notice of Conditional Approval for VA Education Loan, with a VA Form 22-8726 attached.  When the note (original and one copy) is returned, it will be associated with the claimant's folder and routed to the Finance activity for processing the loan check. 

**c.  Application Received Before Enrollment Date.**  The following procedures must be followed if the application for a loan is received  before the period to which the loan is to apply: 

(1)  If eligibility exists, the applicant will be informed by dictated letter that his or her loan has been tentatively approved pending connfirmation of actual attendance on a full-time basis.  The student will be informed that once his or her attendance has been confirmed, a promissory note will be sent for completion and returned to VA for payment of the approved education loan. Take an appropriate end product for the benefit claimed as a final action.  For a chapter 35 claim, this would be an end product 250.  No further end product will be taken when attendance is or is not confirmed for final approval or denial of the loan. 

(2)  The Adjudication Division will establish a control for the pending enrollment and will confirm the enrollment by telephone as the date becomes due.  The claimant's folder will be annotated appropriately when the call to confirm the enrollment is made. 

(3)  If the student's attendance on a full-time basis is confirmed, the student will be sent Form Letter 22-891 and VA Form 22-8726. 

(4)  If the student's attendance on a full-time basis is not confirmed, a dictated denial letter will be prepared and sent to the student. 

(5)  If the student enrolls for fewer credits than originally anticipated resulting in lower charges for tuition and fees, loan eligibility will be reviewed and recomputed if necessary. 

**d.  Notice of Approval.**  When the student is notified of conditional loan approval for post-delimiting date loans, the notice will contain the amount of his or her remaining entitlement (in months) for loan purposes as it exists both before the current loan approval and the amount after loan approval.  The Form Letter 22-891 provides spaces for these entries.  If a dictated letter is used, it also must contain this information.  VA Form 22-8726 (April 1980) indicates that the period for repayment does not commence until the student reduces training time to less than 1/2 time status. 

**e.  Entitlement Accounting for Post-Delimiting Date Loans.**  Adjudication must maintain a record of remaining entitlement used to establish loan eligibility. The examples shown below demonstrate the type of accounting required.  Such an accounting should be made on sturdy white standard-size paper (e.g., bond) and back-filed on the left flap of the claimant's folder.  As shown in the example, the entitlement remaining as of the delimiting date is reduced after each loan is made by an amount equal to the number of months of entitlement that would have been used had the student been in receipt of full-time educational assistance allowance for the period to which the loan applies. This accounting must be updated after each loan is made beyond a claimant's delimiting date. 

EXAMPLES:

Loan After Delimiting Date for Institutional Training  
  
Delimiting Date------------------------------------------------------- June 10, 1989  
Program----------------------------------------------------------------- BA  
In full-time attendance through--------------------------------- May 28, 1989  
Entitlement remaining to establish loan eligibility------- 24 months  
End of 2-year period ----------------------------------------------- June 10, 1991

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Loan after delimiting date approved for the period-------June 15, to August 14, 1989  
Entitlement remaining to establish additional------------ 22 months loan eligibility

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Additional loan after delimiting date approved-------------October 5, for the period to December 4, 1989  
Entitlement remaining to establish additional------------ 20 months loan eligibility

**7.09  DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS**

---

**a.  General.**  The disclosure requirements in the Truth in Lending Act ([15 U.S.C. 1601](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:15 section:1601 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title15-section1601)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) et seq. and [12 CFR Part 226](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?rgn=div5&node=12:3.0.1.1.7)) apply to VA  Edcation loans.  If a loan is approved, the applicant must be provided with the following information before he or she signs VA Form 22-8726, Promissory Note:

(1)  The APRs (annual percentage rates) before repayment and during repayment.

(2)  The amount financed.

(3)  An itemization of the amount financed.

(4)  Information on prepayment of the loan.

**b.  Completing VA Form 22-8726a.**  VA Form 22-8726a, Education Loan Program - Federal Truth-in-Lending Statement, meets the disclosure requirements discussed above.  Adjudication will prepare VA Form 22-8726a in original and one copy (carbon copy or photocopy) at the time they prepare the promissory note.  Each item on VA Form 22-8726a will be typed or printed clearly; no corrections are to be made on the form.  The items are to be completed as follows:

(1)  Annual Percentage Rate.  There are two APRs that must be disclosed for each approved loan at the time that the promissory note is sent to the applicant: The APR before repayment and the APR during repayment.  These APRs are to be distinguished from the stated interest rate which Adjudication enters on the promissory note.

*NOTE:  If, according to paragraph [7.08a(1)(ii)B,](#708a1iiB) the Program Administration Staff (225B) provides an interest rate other than the 7 or 9 percent rate, also obtain from them the APR during repayment for entry on VA Form 22-8726a.*

(i)  APR Before Repayment.  Although a loan is not due for repayment until 9 months after the student ceases to be enrolled on at least a 1/2 time basis and interest does not accrue until that time, an APR must be disclosed to account for the 3 percent loan fee that is withheld at the time of loan disbursement.  The APR before repayment varies according to the length of time between loan disbursement and the date it is due for repayment.  This APR will be disclosed on VA Form 22-8726a in the item "Before Repayment" by entering the APR from the table in [figure 7.01](#f701) that corresponds to the length of time between loan disbursement and the due date for repayment.  The length of this period of time will be determined as follows:

A.  Estimate the month and year when the loan will be disbursed.  Because this date will not be known at the time the promissory note and VA Form 22-8726a are sent, the disbursement date will be presumed to be 30 days after the promissory note is sent unless a more accurate disbursement date can be estimated based on local experience.  Note that this date is an estimate for disclosure purposes       and may not be the actual date that the loan is disbursed.

B.  Estimate the month and year that the loan will be due for repayment by adding 9 months to the month and year that the sudent expects to complete or terminate his or her program of education.  If the expected date of completion or termination is not of record, an estimate of that date must be obtained from the applicant before the promissory note can be released.  However, avoid development if a reasonable completion date can be estimated from the evidence of record.

C.  Subtract the month and year of expected disbursement (subpar. 1 above) from the month and year that the loan will be due for repayment (subpar. 2 above).  The result will be the length of the period before repayment.

D.  Obtain the APR for the period before repayment by referring to the table in [figure 7.01](#f701) which gives the corresponding APR's for the number of months for periods up to 8 years

EXAMPLE:  A promissory note is sent to the student in February 1989.  It is estimated that the loan will be disbursed in March 1989.  Evidence indicates that the student will complete his or her program of education in January 1990.  The loan will be due for repayment beginning in October 1990, 9 months after completion of the program.  The period between disbursement of the loan and the due date for repayment is 19 months.  (Oct. 1990 is 90-10.  Mar. 1989 is 89-3.  90-10 minus 89-3 is 1 year, 7 months or 19 months.)  The APR corresponding to a period of 19 months is 1.95 percent as shown in [figure 7.01](#f701).  The APR of "1.95" will be entered in the item "Before Repayment" on VA Form 22-8726a.

(ii)  APR During Repayment.  This APR varies according to the approved loan amount and the stated interest rate.  This APR differs from the stated interest rate because a 3 percent loan fee is withheld at the time of loan disbursement, the final payment varies from the regular payments, and for loans of less than $600, the amount and time for the first payment differs from the following payments. The APR during repayment for each approved loan amount and interest rates of 7 and 9 percent are shown in [figure 7.02](#f702) for the maximum length of time over which the loan can be repaid.  This APR will be disclosed on VA Form 22-8726a in the item "During Repayment" by entering the APR from the table in [figure 7.02](#f702) that corresponds to the approved amount of the loan at the 7 or 9 percent rate, if either rate is applicable.

*NOTE:  If the Program Administration Staff (225B) provides an interest rate other than 7 or 9 percent, do not use the amount shown in figure 7.02 for the "During Repayment" item.  Obtain the correct amount for entry in this item from the Program Administration Staff.*

 

| **Length of  Period   Before Repayment**  **(In Months)** | **Annual Percentage Rate (In Percentage)** | **Length of  Period  Before Repayment(In Months)** | **Annual Percentage Rate** **(In Percentage)** | **Length of  Period  Before Repayment**  **(In Months)** | **Annual Percentage Rate (In Percentage)** |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | 37.11 | 37 | 1.00 | 73 | 0.51 |
| 2 | 18.56 | 38 | 0.98 | 74 | 0.50 |
| 3 | 12.37 | 39 | 0.95 | 75 | 0.49 |
| 4 | 9.28 | 40 | 0.93 | 76 | 0.49 |
| 5 | 7.42 | 41 | 0.91 | 77 | 0.48 |
| 6 | 6.19 | 42 | 0.88 | 78 | 0.48 |
| 7 | 5.30 | 43 | 0.86 | 79 | 0.47 |
| 8 | 4.64 | 44 | 0.84 | 80 | 0.46 |
| 9 | 4.12 | 45 | 0.82 | 81 | 0.46 |
| 10 | 3.71 | 46 | 0.81 | 82 | 0.45 |
| 11 | 3.37 | 47 | 0.79 | 83 | 0.45 |
| 12 | 3.09 | 48 | 0.77 | 84 | 0.44 |
| 13 | 2.85 | 49 | 0.76 | 85 | 0.44 |
| 14 | 2.65 | 50 | 0.74 | 86 | 0.43 |
| 15 | 2.47 | 51 | 0.73 | 87 | 0.43 |
| 16 | 2.32 | 52 | 0.71 | 88 | 0.42 |
| 17 | 2.18 | 53 | 0.70 | 89 | 0.42 |
| 18 | 2.06 | 54 | 0.69 | 90 | 0.41 |
| 19 | 1.95 | 55 | 0.67 | 91 | 0.41 |
| 20 | 1.86 | 56 | 0.66 | 92 | 0.40 |
| 21 | 1.77 | 57 | 0.65 | 93 | 0.40 |
| 22 | 1.69 | 58 | 0.64 | 94 | 0.39 |
| 23 | 1.61 | 59 | 0.63 | 95 | 0.39 |
| 24 | 1.55 | 60 | 0.62 | 96 | 0.39 |
| 25 | 1.48 | 61 | 0.61 |  |  |
| 26 | 1.43 | 62 | 0.60 |  |  |
| 27 | 1.37 | 63 | 0.59 |  |  |
| 28 | 1.33 | 64 | 0.58 |  |  |
| 29 | 1.28 | 65 | 0.57 |  |  |
| 30 | 1.24 | 66 | 0.56 |  |  |
| 31 | 1.20 | 67 | 0.55 |  |  |
| 32 | 1.16 | 68 | 0.55 |  |  |
| 33 | 1.12 | 69 | 0.54 |  |  |
| 34 | 1.09 | 70 | 0.53 |  |  |
| 35 | 1.06 | 71 | 0.52 |  |  |
| 36 | 1.03 | 72 | 0.52 |  |  |

**7.01  Table of Annual Percentage Rates Before Repayment**

 ---

EXAMPLE:  A loan is approved for $270 at 9 percent.  The APR corresponding to that loan amount is shown as 8.00 percent in [figure 7.02](#f702).  The APR of "8.00" will be entered in the item "During Repayment" on VA Form 22-8726a.

| **Approved Amount of Loan    (In Dollars)** | **Annual Percentage Rate  (In Percentage)** | |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  | 7 Percent Loan | 9 Percent Loan |
| 50 | 6.75 | 7.50 |
| 60 | 6.00 | 7.00 |
| 70 | 6.25 | 7.25 |
| 80 | 6.25 | 7.50 |
| 90 | 6.00 | 7.00 |
| 100 | 6.25 | 7.25 |
| 110 | 6.25 | 7.50 |
| 120 | 6.00 | 7.25 |
| 130 through 160 | 6.25 | 7.50 |
| 170 | 6.25 | 7.75 |
| 180 | 6.25 | 7.50 |
| 190 | 6.25 | 7.50 |
| 200 through 220 | 6.25 | 7.75 |
| 230 | 6.50 | 7.75 |
| 240 | 6.25 | 7.75 |
| 250 | 6.50 | 7.75 |
| 260 | 6.50 | 7.75 |
| 270 through 350 | 6.50 | 8.00 |
| 360 | 6.50 | 7.75 |
| 370 | 6.50 | 8.00 |
| 380 | 6.50 | 8.25 |
| 390 | 6.50 | 8.00 |
| 400 | 6.50 | 8.25 |
| 410 | 6.50 | 8.00 |
| 420 | 6.50 | 8.00 |
| 430 through 550 | 6.50 | 8.25 |
| 560 | 6.75 | 8.25 |
| 570 through 590 | 6.50 | 8.25 |
| 600 and above | 7.50 | 9.50 |

**7.02  Table of Annual Percentage Rates During Repayment**

---

(2)  Prepaid Finance Charge.  Enter 3 percent of the approved amount of the loan.  To obtain this amount, multiply the approved loan amount by .03; do not round the result to the nearest dollar.

EXAMPLE:  A loan is approved for $510.  The prepaid finance charge is $15.30 ($510 X .03).  Enter "15.30" in the item "Prepaid Finance Charge" on VA Form 22-8726a.

(3)  Amount Financed and Amount To Be Given to You Directly.  Enter the amount that will be disbursed to the student; i.e., the approved loan amount minus the prepaid finance charge.  To obtain this amount, subtract the 3 percent prepaid finance charge (subpar. (2) above) from the approved loan amount.

EXAMPLE:  For an approved loan of $510, the prepaid finance charge is $15.30.  The amount to be disbursed to the student is $494.70 ($510 - $15.30).  Enter "494.70" in the item "Amount Financed" and "Amount to Be Given to You Directly."

**c.  Processing VA Form 22-8726a.**  The original of VA Form 22-8726a will be attached to the top of the front side of the promissory note. The copy will be filed in the claimant's folder.  If the applicant returns the original of this form along with the promissory note for payment of the loan, return VA Form 22-8726a to the student.

**7.10  TWO-SIGNATURE REQUIREMENT**

---

All actions approving or denying education loans require a second signature by a senior adjudicator or higher grade employee.  In addition, this individual will initial the file copy of VA Form 22-8726a.  Approved education loans will also be reviewed and initialed by the Adjudication Officer or Assistant Adjudication Officer before notice of approval or tentative approval is sent to the applicant. 

**7.11  END PRODUCT CODE**

---

Take an appropriate end product for the appropriate benefit claimed for loan approvals and denials.  For a chapter 35 education loan, this would be an end product 250.

**7.12  NOTICE OF PROCEDURAL AND APPELLATE RIGHTS**

---

The claimant will be provided a notice of procedural and appellate rights on all loan determinations.  The normal appeals process will be followed if the claimant disagrees with a decision.  It is essential that all cases be fully documented before they are forwarded to the Board of Veterans Appeals. 

**7.13  PAYMENT OF LOAN**

---

**a**.  Payment of the loan will be made by the Finance activity when the completed VA Form 22-8726 is returned by the student.  A loan fee of 3 percent of the loan amount approved will be deducted to provide a fund to insure against defaults under the loan program. 

**b**.  If the adjudicator had indicated on VA Form 22-8726 that the education loan check should be mailed to the school, the loan payment will be made payable to the veteran or eligible person and will be mailed to the school in which the student is enrolled.  The school will deliver the check to the student as soon as practicable after its receipt and will certify to VA that the check has been delivered; or

**c.**  If the adjudicator had indicated on VA Form 22-8726 that the education loan check should be mailed to the student, the loan payment will be mailed directly to the veteran or eligible person.  Under such circumstances, the Finance activity will process loan payments using the veteran's or eligible person's current mailing address as shown on the promissory note.  A certification of delivery will not be required. 

**d.**  VA Form 4-5220a, Certification of Delivery of Education Loan Payment (CODL), will be used to verify delivery of the loan payment check by the school.  The form will be mailed to the school with the check.  The Finance activity will complete this form as appropriate.  The school address will be the same address as shown on the promissory note.  When the check is delivered, the student must sign the CODL.  The school certifying official will then certify the delivery of the loan payment check.  The school will retain a copy of the certification for their records and will return the original to the regional office at the address shown on the certification. 

 **7.14  REPAYMENT OF LOAN**

---

**a**.  Repayment of the loan must begin 9 months after the student ceases to be enrolled on at least a 1/2 time basis.  However, repayment of both principal and interest will be deferred during any period of enrollment of at least 1/2 time even though the student may have  made partial payments on a previous loan or loans. 

(1)  For loans of $600 or more, repayment must be made over a 10-year period beginning 9 months after the student's enrollment is reduced to less than 1/2 time. 

(2)  For loans of less than $600, the repayment period will be 1 month for each $5 of the loan, and will begin 9 months after the student ceases to be enrolled on at least a 1/2 time basis.  However, a minimum of $50 must be repaid during the first 10 months of the repayment period. 

**b**.  Repayment of both principal and interest may be made on the installment plan or in one lump sum.  There is no penalty for prepaying all or part of the loan. 

**c.**  Interest at the rate indicated on VA Form 22-8726 will apply to the unpaid balance. 

**d**.  A loan default will occur when the borrower fails to meet the agreed-upon repayment schedule.  A default will be treated as an overpayment and recovered in the same manner as any other debt due the United States. 

**7.15  LOAN STATUS INDICATOR**

---

**a**.  The loan status indicator shows the current repayment status of an education loan.

**b**.  The indicator with corresponding legend is displayed on the M24 screen (Education Master Record Miscellaneous Data) in the LOAN STATUS field.  The following are the indicators and legends that may be displayed with the current repayment status (if any) shown following the legend:

| **Indicator** | **Legend** | **Current Repayment Status** |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **O** | NO LOAN |  |
| **C** | LOAN REPAID | Loan totally repaid  (status includes write-offs for death, disability, or bankruptcy). |
| **D** | DEFAULTED | Loan defaulted  (status includes uncollectible loans). |
| **L** | DEFER PAY PERIOD | Deferred payment period  (student is training 1/2 time or more). |
| **P** | GRACE PERIOD | Loan diaried for repayment notification. |
| **R** | REPAYMENT | Loan being repaid. |

**c.** The loan indicator will be established in the master record (or may be changed, when appropriate) by use of the CORR (Correction) command.  The Finance activity will ensure that necessary action is taken to establish or change the indicator as warranted by the repayment status of the loan. 

(1)  Loan indicator "L" cannot be established in a terminated (type E) master record. 

(2)  Loan indicator "P" will be established in the master records of students who are granted post-delimiting date loans until expiration of the grace period for repayment.  At that time, the loan indicator will be changed to "R," "C," or "D," as appropriate. 

**d.**  When a transfer to another field station is requested on any education case, the loan status indicator will be reviewed to determine if a loan account exists.  If the status indicator is other than "O," the appropriate education loan records must be associated with the claimant's folder before it is transferred out of the station. 

**7.16  SCHOOL FINANCIAL AID OFFICER'S RESPONSIBILITIES**

---

**a.**  The financial aid officer (or other school official acting in that capacity) is in the best position to advise students in financial need.  He or she knows the current status of various financial assistance programs, the availability of other types of financial aid, and the current costs of school attendance that the average student must meet. Therefore, it is important for the success of the education loan program that appropriate VA field station personnel develop and maintain a close working relationship with school financial aid officers. 

**b**.  The school must complete all items in item 14 of part III and the certification in part IV on the loan application. 

**c.** The school must also review the student's financial resources in part II and related educational expenses in part III of the loan application to determine if they appear to be accurate and reasonable based on the school's current experience with other similarly enrolled students. 

(1)  If the school does not believe that certain items are accurate or reasonable, the certifying official must list the item numbers as exceptions in item 15, "Remarks," on the application.  For example, if the applicant lists $200 for books, but the school believes that $75 would be reasonable, the school would indicate "Exception to item 13A - $75" in "Remarks." 

(2)  If the school lists a lesser amount, the school's figure will be used to compute the loan amount.  If a loan is approved, the student will be notified of the adjustment and that he or she may submit evidence to justify the higher amount. 

**d**.  If an individual other than the school's financial aid officer is the designated certifying official for VA loan applications, the certifying official should verify the student's reported receipt or nonreceipt of financial aid with the financial aid officer before certifying the loan application to VA.  The education liaison representative will ensure that certifying officials are made aware of this procedure. 

**7.17  LIAISON WITH SCHOOL FINANCIAL AID OFFICERS**

---

VA should assist school financial aid officers in understanding their responsibilities to VA under the education loan program.  Such liaison should be positive in nature and should provide school financial officers with sufficient information to enable them to not only meet their responsibilities to VA under the loan program, but also to veterans and eligible persons who, without additional financial assistance, might not be able to enter or continue pursuing a program of education.