# M22-4, Part 10, Compliance Survey. Chapter 03, Compliance Survey Procedures.

**M22-4, Part 10, Compliance Survey Procedures**  
*Last Updated: April 5, 2019*

[3.01  Preparation for Survey](#301)  
[3.02  Class Checks and Student Interviews](#302)  
[3.03  Briefing School Officials](#303)  
[3.04  Verification of Enrollment Data](#304)  
[3.05  Pursuit of Approved Program or Course](#305)  
[3.06  Credit for Previous Education and Training](#306)  
[3.07  Records and Reports of Enrollment, Changes in Enrollment, and Termination or Interruption](#307)  
[3.08  Records and Reports of Progress, Conduct, or Attendance](#308)   
[3.09  Questionable Advertising, Sales, or Enrollment Practices](#309)  
[3.10  Guidelines for Reviewing Advertisement Practices](#310)  
[3.11  Recruiting Practices](#311)  
[3.12  GI Bill ® Trademark](#312)  
[3.13  Power of Attorney/Non-assignability of Benefits](#313)  
  
**Figures**  
[3.01  Checklist for Class Checks](#f301)  
[3.02  Sample Letter to SCOs Regarding Face-to-Face Student Interviews](#f302)  
[3.03  Sample Questions for Face-to-Face Interviews](#f303)  
[3.04  Checklist for Individual Case Reviews](#f304)  
[3.05  Sample Violation Notification Letter](#f305)

For the purposes of this chapter, the term Education Compliance Survey Specialist (ECSS) includes any position performing the duties of that position. This includes, but is not limited to, Education Liaison Representatives (ELR) and State Approving Agencies (SAA).

**3.01  PREPARATION FOR SURVEY**

---

The quality of compliance surveys depends on the adequacy of preparation. This section will detail exactly what type of information should be reviewed during the preparation phase for conducting a compliance review. As part of the preparation for the survey, the following should be reviewed, as appropriate:

• School or Training Establishment’s Approval file  
• School or Training Establishment’s Compliance survey file (if a survey has been previously conducted)  
• School’s Current Catalog/handbook (if the school is an Institute of Higher Learning (IHL) or Non-College Degree (NCD) facility)  
• Benefits Delivery Network (BDN) records for those students in the sample review  
• The Image Management System (TIMS) folders for those students in the sample review  
• The VA Online Certification Enrollment (VA-ONCE) system  
• Long Term Solution (LTS)  
•The Flight, On-the-Job Training (OJT), Correspondence, and Apprenticeship (APP) System (FOCAS) and  
• The Postsecondary Education Complaint System (PECS)

The ECSS should make notes about beneficiary information (e.g., prior education, attendance at branch location, verification of award data) on the individual worksheets.

The ECSS should note overarching items for each general area of review affecting all cases (e.g., progress standards in effect during the review period, approved tuition and fees, 85 percent enrollment restriction certifications, etc.).

**a. Time Period of Review.** Student records from the three prior academic years will be included if the facility had a student attending in that school year or the date of the last survey, if that record was included in the sample. Records should be kept for a minimum of three years after the claimant’s enrollment has ended. When a claimant's program of education or training consists of several separate terms or unit courses, the time limit will be applied separately to each such term or course. (See M22-4, Part 10, Compliance Survey. Chapter 01, Introduction).

1. Apply the review criteria (i.e., applicable laws and regulations) in accordance with the proper effective dates during the period of review. The provisions of laws and regulations cannot be applied for any period before their effective date

EXAMPLE: A student is taking 9 credits for two 3 credit classes (held Tuesday and Thursday) and one 3 credit class (held Friday) during a standard term. The term began on a Friday. The school would submit one enrollment certification for this term for all 9 credits with a begin date of the first day of term and the normal term end date. Prior to April 25, 2016, the school would have been required to report individual start dates for each class.

2. The compliance survey review period will begin effective the ending period of the prior survey review period and end effective the last period which has been certified by the school or training establishment and completed by the students in the review sample (e.g., last term completed, last month of training certified, etc.) It may be necessary to review previous enrollment periods (if records are available) in order to determine if school regulations regarding unsatisfactory progress were enforced, if courses have been repeated or if other discrepancies are suspected in a specific case.

3. The time period covered by a compliance survey will vary depending on the type of facility and the date of the last compliance survey.

• For IHL and NCD schools operating on a term basis, the period covered will normally start from the beginning of a term through the end of the last completed term.  
• For NCD schools not operating on a term basis, flight schools, and OJT establishments, the period will normally be from the end of the last survey through the end of the last period certified by the school.

These dates should be shown on VA Form 22-1934, Compliance Survey Report.<https://vbaw.vba.va.gov/bl/20/cio/20s5/forms/VBA-22-1934-ARE.PDF>

4. The dates on individual case worksheets do not have to agree with those on the covering VA Form 22-1934 and may be different for each case in the sample. The beginning date will be the first day the student entered the facility, provided that the record was not reviewed on a prior survey. If the record was reviewed on a prior survey, the beginning date would be at least one day after the ending date on the prior worksheet.

The ending date on the worksheet may be before or after the ending date on VA Form 22-1934. If the student terminated before the ending date on VA Form 22-1934, the ending date on the worksheet will be the student's last date of attendance. If the student is enrolled during the survey, the ending date on the individual case worksheet will be the last day that the records were actually posted and reviewed.  
 

EXAMPLE 1: An IHL survey is conducted on November 17, 2015. The prior survey was conducted on April 13, 2012, with an ending date on the VA Form 22-1934 of December 31, 2011. The Period Covered by Survey block on the VA Form 22-1934 will show January 15, 2012 (beginning date of spring term), through August 5, 2015 (last day of summer session).

• For a student whose record was reviewed on the prior survey, the beginning date on the individual worksheet will be January 15, 2012.  
• For a student who initially enrolled on September 5, 2014, and whose record was not reviewed on the prior survey, the beginning date will be September 5, 2014.

EXAMPLE 2: An NCD survey is conducted on November 20, 2014. The prior survey was on October 5, 2011, with an ending date of September 30, 2011.

• The Period Covered by Survey Block on the VA Form 22-1934 will show October 1, 2011 through October 31, 2014.  
• The dates on the worksheet for a student enrolled from November 12, 2011 through March 31, 2014 will be those exact dates.

**b. Approval File.** When reviewing the approval file as part of the prep work, obtain the following information from material in the file:

1. The names and titles of school officials including certifying officials, officers or other administrative staff who may be interviewed during the site visit.

2. The dates of school registration, vacation periods and the hours of office operation. When possible, compliance surveys should not be conducted during peak enrollment periods such as registration or during vacation periods if class checks and student interviews are planned;

3. A list of approved programs and courses, or “WEAMS 1998 Report”.

4. The school policy as published in the catalog or other official publication for determining unsatisfactory progress based upon grades, grade point average (GPA), attendance or other criteria as approved by the SAA;

5. The procedure in effect for determining and reporting unsatisfactory progress (typically found in the school catalog which is part of the approval file);

6. The approved charges for tuition, fees, books, and supplies (does not apply to OJT/APP programs);

7. For resident courses not leading to a standard college degree, the beginning and ending times of classes and break periods (typically found in the school catalog which is part of the approval file);

8. Any enrollment limitations established by the SAA or required for non-accredited courses ([38 United States Code (USC) 3676(c)(11)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3676 edition:prelim)); [38 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 21.4254(c)(11)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=3ebe1c454c1fb917d238976d3828fcf0&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14254));

9. Certifications and waivers relating to the 85 percent enrollment restriction, power of attorney, normal completion time for correspondence courses, etc.;

10. The problem areas, if any, as noted in SAA supervisory visit reports received after the previous survey, if available;

11. Any correspondence or other communication of record which may have a bearing on the survey such as complaint letters, reports of contact between the facility and VA. The ECSS should also include other sources, such as the Postsecondary Education Complaint System (PECS).

**c. Compliance Survey File.** When reviewing the compliance survey file, obtain the following information from material in the file:

1. The nature and extent of the discrepancies, if any, found during prior compliance surveys;

2. The system used by the school for keeping records and the location of school records;

3. The types of forms the school utilizes (i.e. applications, enrollment agreement, etc.).

**d. Individual Case Information.** If the remote survey option has been chosen, preliminary review of individual case information is combined with the actual comparison of VA and school records. See the below paragraph and M22-4, Part 10, Compliance Survey. Chapter 04, Procedures Applicable to Facilities Offering Specific Types of Training. Do not routinely request copies of documents from schools that have been submitted to VA (e.g., VA Form 22-1999). When such documents are needed, they should be obtained from TIMS or VA-ONCE. The following information should be obtained from material in the TIMS folders, BDN and LTS records for all cases in the initial sample:

1. Prior education and training as shown on the claimant’s application, on the Veteran's discharge certificate, and previous enrollment certifications;

2. Recent award changes which may not be reflected on the compliance survey worksheet;

3. Students who are recipients of tutorial assistance;

4. Students who are enrolled in practical training or cooperative programs;

5. Students whose residence address is outside the normal commuting distance of the campus;

6. Any other information of record which may be useful during student interviews

**e. Worksheet Preparation.** A worksheet is needed for each case in the sample. The ECSS can use whichever form is appropriate. Generally one is used for non-Chapter 33 cases and the other for Chapter 33 claims. One must be used in all surveys.

• VA Forms 22-1936a is used for non-Chapter 33 cases.  
• The Chapter 33 Compliance Worksheet is used for Chapter 33 cases.•

For each case selected, the information needed to complete the applicable portions of this form can be obtained from any of the following sources:

• BDN master record  
• FOCAS tear sheet  
• LTS  
• SHARE  
• The TIMS folder

Required information can be copied onto the form, or printouts of the appropriate BDN master record can be attached to the form. If printouts are attached, they must be redacted.

Modifications of these worksheets, to include overprints or alternate local forms, may be used with the approval of the Chief, Education Liaison Officer (CELO). To ensure relatively current information is used, worksheets should be prepared as close to the date of the survey as possible. VA Forms 22-1936a or other worksheets prepared for cases not initially selected for review should be retained until completion of the survey, in case the survey sample must be expanded.

**f. Notification of Survey.**Education and Training Institutions should be notified in advance of a compliance survey.  Title 38 USC § 3693(c) requires to the maximum extent feasible a notice to the institution of not more than 10-business days before conducting a compliance survey. 

The 10-business day window excludes Saturdays, Sundays, and federal holidays.  For calculation purposes, the first business day is the date notification is provided to the institution and the last day is the business day preceding the date the compliance survey is conducted.  The day the compliance survey is conducted does not constitute a business day of advance notice. 

**Example 1:**  VA provided notification of its intent to conduct a compliance survey to an institution on May 5, 2025.  VA conducted the compliance survey on May 15, 2025.  In this example, excluding 2 weekend days, the school was provided notice of 8 business days before VA conducted the compliance survey.

**Example 2:** VA provided notification of its intent to conduct a compliance survey to an institution on May 5, 2025.  VA conducted the compliance survey on May 19, 2025.  In this example, excluding 4 weekend days, the school was provided notice of 10 business days before VA conducted the compliance survey.

When deviations from the advance notification requirement are necessary, a CELO has the authority to consider the rationale and approve or disapprove.  A decision granting a deviation must be documented and captured into Salesforce.

**3.02 CLASS CHECKS AND STUDENT INTERVIEWS**

---

This section will help determine if class checks are necessary to complete a compliance survey at a given school, as well as information on face-to-face student interviews. Tools to assist in performing class checks and face-to-face student interviews, including checklists, sample letters, and interview questions also are available.

**a. Class Checks.** The ECSS will determine whether class checks should be conducted. The ECSS should base the decision on indications of possible problems, e.g., that should be conducted based on signs of possible problems.

EXAMPLE: If classes are not actually held as scheduled, or if the school’s attendance policy is not being enforced, class checks should be done. The decision to conduct a class check should be documented in the survey narrative.

Depending on the reason for conducting the class checks, selection of classes may be made before or during the on-site survey. The results of the class check will also be included in the narrative portion of the survey report.

The checklist in Figure 3.01 should be used as a guide to conducting class checks. It is not necessary to follow the checklist exactly. Questions may be added or deleted to suit individual circumstances.

**Figure 3.01. Checklist for Class Checks**

| **CHECKLIST FOR OPTIONAL CLASS CHECKS** |
| --- |
| Identify the class by course name, instructor's name, date and time. |
| Did the class start and end at the scheduled times? |
| Were hours of instruction and class breaks in accord with approval requirements? |
| Was attendance properly and accurately recorded? |
| If there was an enrollment limitation, was it exceeded? |
| Is there a high absentee rate? |
| What types of attendance records are used? |
| Are attendance records adequate for reporting under the school's approved attendance policy? |
| How is the school's attendance policy enforced? |
| Do records for prior dates show similar attendance patterns? |
| Are the space and equipment adequate for the number of students assigned? |
| Were any other problems encountered? |

**b. Student Interviews.** Face-to-face interviews with students in receipt of VA benefits are a useful tool as part of a compliance survey. Interviews are conducted to gather information from students about their experience at school.

1. Student Notification. ECSSs should send a request to the SCO to inform students who are receiving VA benefits about the pending visit and interviews. ECSSs should use Figure 3.02 (Sample Letter to SCOs Regarding Face-to-Face Student Interviews) for content that can be used in an e-mail or letter. The letter should clearly identify a date and time for the interviews and outline the intent. A courtesy copy of the invite should be provided to the ECSS.

2. Interview Questions. Participation by any student must be voluntary. Selection of students for interviews should generally be made on site. ECSSs should document student interviews on VA Form 119, Report of Contact. Before an interview, be sure to inform the student of the following:  
 

• Purpose of the interview  
• Uses of the requested information  
• His or her protection under the Privacy Act of 1974

3. Questions for Face-to-Face Interviews. It is highly encouraged to use the script and questions on Figure 3.03 (Sample Questions for Face-to-Face Interviews).

4. Reporting Requirements. ECSSs must submit a monthly report regarding face-to-face meetings to their CELO. This report should include the following:

• Name of the school visited;  
• Number of students interviewed at each school;  
• Information pertaining to erroneous, deceptive, or misleading practices.

 Dear School Certifying Official,

VA will be conducting face-to-face interviews with students who are receiving VA benefits as part of our compliance visit protocol. Please provide a private office to use for these meetings. To ensure an opportunity for all students receiving VA benefits to meet with a VA representative, I am asking that you send the following e-mail to all active students in receipt of VA benefits in advance of my visit.

***The representative from the Department of Veteran Affairs will be available on (date) at (time at least 2 hours) to conduct individual interviews. These interviews will focus on your experience at our school, not on individual benefit issues. I encourage you to participate. Please remember that if you have benefit issues, call 1-888-GIBILL-1. Participation is strictly voluntary.***

We appreciate your cooperation in this matter.

[Name of Survey Specialist]

Position Title

VA Office to include contact information

**Figure 3.02 Sample Letter to SCOs Regarding Face-to-Face Student Interviews**

***RECOMMENDED SCRIPT:***

*The information requested in this interview in connection with your training is requested under authority of Title 38 USC, Section 527.  
While you are not required to respond, your cooperation is needed to determine that payments made by VA to eligible students  
are in keeping with the law, to ensure that the programs eligible students are pursuing meet the requirements of the law  
and regulations, and to assist school officials in the preparation of required certifications by the school. The information  
you provide may be disclosed outside VA only if the disclosure is authorized under the Privacy Act, including the routine uses  
identified in VA system of records 58VA21/22, Compensation, Pension, Education and Rehabilitation Records—VA,  
published in the Federal Register. Your disclosure of the information is voluntary. Failure to furnish this information  
will have no adverse effects on your participation in the course or receipt of VA benefits to which eligible students may be entitled.*

|  |
| --- |
| Questions for All Facilities  1. What program/courses are you taking?  2. Did your school evaluate previous education and training? If so, what was the outcome?  3. What tuition and fees were you charged?  4. Were you offered any discounts? If so, please explain.  5. Were all fees and charges explained to you during your interview?  6. Are you receiving any other Federal financial assistance for education? If so, what type (Pell grant, loans, etc.)?  7. Is your payment being sent to the correct location?  If mailed to the school, is it delivered to you unopened? \_\_Yes \_\_No  Do you endorse it yourself? \_\_Yes \_\_No  8. Are you having any trouble with VA education benefits? If so, please explain.  9. Have you had any extended period of absence or had a vacation since enrollment? If so, please explain.  10. What is your schedule of attendance/training? (days per week, hours per day)  11. Are you taking any courses online?  12. Are you currently in a full-time active duty status?  13. How would you rate the quality of your instruction (on a scale of 1 to 5, with 1 being the lowest to 5 being the highest)?  Was your experience with the program you enrolled in:  \_\_\_ More difficult than you expected  \_\_\_ What you expected  \_\_\_ Easier than you expected  14. How and why did you select this school? Examples: Internet, local newspaper, telephone call, recruitment.  15. Were you offered any incentives for enrolling?  16. Did your counselor attempt to direct you into programs that you did not want to pursue?  17. Do you have any questions/concerns about the school/training establishment? If so, explain.  18. Please rate how the marketing materials or recruiter at the school/university you are enrolled at influenced your decision to enroll in that program.  \_\_\_ Definitely did not influence my decision  \_\_\_ Somewhat influenced my decision  \_\_\_ Absolutely influenced my decision  Those that answered “Somewhat” or “Absolutely” in question 18:  19. To what degree was your experience consistent with what was presented to you in any marketing materials or by a recruiter?  \_\_\_ Not at all consistent  \_\_\_ Somewhat consistent  \_\_\_ Very consistent |

**Figure 3.03 Sample Questions for Face-to-Face Interviews**

[Go To Top](#top)

**3.03 BRIEFING SCHOOL OFFICIALS**

---

When conducting a compliance survey, the surveyor will provide an Entrance Briefing before conducting the records review, and an Exit Briefing to  school officials upon completion of the records review. This section will provide details about what information should be included in these briefings.

**a. Entrance Briefing**

1. Upon arrival at the ETI, the surveyor should contact the appropriate official and advise him or her of the purpose of the visit. There are two main purposes of compliance surveys:

• To assist school or training establishment officials and eligible claimants in understanding the provisions and requirement of the law, and  
• To verify and ensure the correctness of VA educational benefit payments to eligible claimants.

If the facility administrative official contacted by the surveyor is someone other than the president, owner, or other principal facility official, the surveyor should request that the principal official be informed of the compliance survey. It is preferable to meet briefly with the principal official to inform him or her of the survey. If a personal meeting is not possible, the surveyor should request that the principal official be informed of the survey and of the reviewer’s availability to meet with him or her at any time during the on-site survey. In any event, the surveyor should ensure that the principal official is informed of the survey during or as soon as possible after the entrance briefing.

The Entrance Briefing should accomplish the following:

• Make arrangements for a workspace;  
• Explain the need to interview students and visit classes and make arrangements for these activities; and  
• Explain the need for an exit briefing at the end of the survey.

2. Refusal to participate in Compliance Survey. In the event that the ETI's officials object to the review of school records, the surveyor should remind them that, notwithstanding any other provision of law, student records must be made available for review ([38 USC 3690(c)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3690 edition:prelim))). Refusal to make records available for review could lead to withdrawal of approval ([38 CFR 21.4209](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=7cd00ad2a08e8fbbf19a886f2e4f937f&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14209)). If the school officials still refuse to make records available, the surveyor should send a referral through the appropriate channels to the SAA.

3. Setting up Workspace. During the Entrance Briefing, the surveyor should make arrangements with the facility to set up a work space. This space should be in a place where interruption of activities of the ETI is limited as much as possible during review of school records.

If necessary, the surveyor should request a private room where students can be interviewed.

4. Remote Review. If the remote review option is used, the Entrance Briefing is conducted by telephone before the records are reviewed. The same general information must be conveyed to school officials as in the Entrance Briefing for an on-site survey.

**b. Exit Briefing.** After all the documents have been received and all records have been reviewed, the surveyor must conduct an Exit Briefing without delay with  ETI officials at the same level at which the Entrance Briefing was conducted. Any delay over 3 business days must be documented in the narrative. The purpose of the Exit Briefing is to inform the appropriate school official of the survey findings, except those which may involve fraud.

1. Discuss Discrepancies. During the Exit Briefing, discuss with facility officials the appropriate corrective action by the facility for discrepancies not involving approval criteria. Advise facility officials that the discrepancies found not involving approval criteria will be confirmed in writing. In addition, if additional corrective action needs to be taken by the facility, the written confirmation will request the facility to furnish a report of the corrective action taken within 60 days. (See *Discrepancy Referrals* (M22-4, Part 10, Compliance Survey. Chapter 06, Referrals)).

i. Discrepancies that restrict enrollment. If discrepancies are found which require restrictions on further Veteran enrollments such as violation of the 85 percent limitation, advise facility officials VA may not approve the enrollment of any Veterans who may enroll in the course in the future until the requirements are again met. Suspension must be confirmed in writing. (See *Reports and Correspondence: Correspondence to School or Training Establishment*, M22-4, Part 10, Compliance Survey, Chapter 07, Reports and Correspondence, for more information).

ii. Approval Criteria Discrepancies. If discrepancies are found which involve approval criteria, the surveyor will refer any approval discrepancies to the appropriate SAA/ELR for submission to the SAA. Refer to M22-4, Part 10, Compliance Survey, Chapter 07, Reports and Correspondence, for template of referral document.

The report to the SAA should include a detailed and descriptive narrative. The surveyor should be careful to not make recommendations for the elimination or correction of approval criteria discrepancies, except in those instances where VA is acting as the SAA. The surveyor should inform the SCO that the discrepancies found will be confirmed in writing and referred to the SAA for corrective action. The surveyor should also advise the SCO if educational assistance payments may be affected pending correction of an approval criteria violation by the SAA.

2. School Rebuttal. School officials not in agreement with the findings of the survey may offer rebuttal. The rebuttal is part of the record but request appropriate corrective action (including suspension of further payments of benefits to individuals where indicated) only based on facts found. If additional records exist that were not available during the remote review or on-site survey, allow a reasonable period of time (not to exceed 30 days) for school officials to locate records which would support the data certified. If additional records exist, either the school must submit records, or the survey specialist must make a follow-up visit in order to complete the survey.

3. Remote Review Exit Briefing. If the remote review option is used, the Exit Briefing is conducted by telephone at the completion of the records review. The same general information must be conveyed to school officials as in the Exit Briefing for an on-site survey.

**3.04 VERIFICATION OF ENROLLMENT DATA**

---

This section features information about the requirements and review procedures for verifying student enrollment.

**a. Requirements.** The student must have been enrolled on the date the school has certified/reported. He or she must be pursuing the same program that is certified by the school on VA Form 22-1999, Enrollment Certification or VA Form 22-1999-1 (VA- ONCE). ([38 CFR 21.4131(b)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=1bc13057755a89cc145fa09db7c6bb3f&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14131), [21.4203(b)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=1bc13057755a89cc145fa09db7c6bb3f&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14203), [21.5810(b)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=1bc13057755a89cc145fa09db7c6bb3f&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15810), [21.5831](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=1bc13057755a89cc145fa09db7c6bb3f&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15831), [21.7131](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=1bc13057755a89cc145fa09db7c6bb3f&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17131), [21.7152](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=1bc13057755a89cc145fa09db7c6bb3f&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17152), [21.7631](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=1bc13057755a89cc145fa09db7c6bb3f&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17631), and [21.7652(a)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=1bc13057755a89cc145fa09db7c6bb3f&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17652))

**b. Review Procedures.** During preparation for the survey, compare the beginning date as certified by the school with the effective date of the award as shown on the survey worksheet. Review the school's records to determine if that actually was the date that enrollment began. For specific types of training, see Chapter 04 (*Facilities Offering Specific Types of Training*).

During the survey preparation, note the student's program as certified by the school. Determine through review of basic school enrollment records if this is the same program in which the student is actually enrolled. If necessary, correct the course code shown on the compliance survey worksheet.

**3.05 PURSUIT OF APPROVED PROGRAM OR COURSE ([38 USC 3470](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3470 edition:prelim)), [3491](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3491 edition:prelim)), [3521](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3521 edition:prelim)), [3675](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3675 edition:prelim)), and [3676](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3676 edition:prelim)))**

---

**a. Requirements.** Claimants must pursue an approved program leading to an educational, vocational or professional goal. ([38 CFR 21.3130(b)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=1bc13057755a89cc145fa09db7c6bb3f&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_13130), [21.5131](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=1bc13057755a89cc145fa09db7c6bb3f&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15131), [21.7130](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=1bc13057755a89cc145fa09db7c6bb3f&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17130), and [21.7630](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=1bc13057755a89cc145fa09db7c6bb3f&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17630)) Deviations from the approved program are generally not permitted in areas such as the following:

• Variations from the schedule of courses required for a specific degree;  
• Excessive electives;  
• Pursuit of courses outside of the degree plan.

Exceptions may be permitted when school officials allow individuals to substitute a course. If all or part of the program is being furnished by another school under contract, that school must have obtained approval from the SAA having jurisdiction over its location. (38 CFR 21.4233 (c) and 21.4252(m))

**b. Review Procedures.** The ECSS must review the following:

• Transcripts  
• Grade reports  
• Degree audit check list  
• Catalog

Determine if students have taken courses or subjects appropriate for their program. Compare the courses completed with the recommended curriculum as listed in the catalog or other training plan or provided to the student from other sources, such as academic counselor or head of department.

**c. Compliance Survey Individual Case Review Checklist.** The Compliance Survey Individual Case Review Checklist ([Figure 3.04](#f304)) may be used as a guide by the ECSS during individual case reviews. The order of items on this checklist generally follows the arrangement of areas of review in Chapter 3 and Chapter 4, and indicates the corresponding line number on VA Form 22-1934.

**3.06 CREDIT FOR PREVIOUS EDUCATION AND TRAINING ([38 USC. 3675(b)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3675 edition:prelim)) and [3676(c)(4)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3676 edition:prelim)))**

---

**a. Requirements.** Schools and training establishments are required to maintain a record of previous education and training of all eligible claimants. When a student has previous education or training, schools must do the following:

• Evaluate the training  
• Grant Appropriate credit  
• Shorten the course proportionally  
• Notify the student,

This requirement is necessary because benefits may not be paid for pursuit of an objective for which an eligible claimant is already qualified. ([10 USC 16136(b)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:16136 edition:prelim)); [38 USC 3471](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3471 edition:prelim))) However, benefits may be paid for the pursuit of refresher training. ([10 USC 16131(b) and (c)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:10 section:16131 edition:prelim)); [38 USC 3034(a)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3034 edition:prelim)), [3241(a)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3241 edition:prelim)), and [3482(d)(1)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3482 edition:prelim))) For additional information about refresher training and about when a claimant is considered already qualified, see M22-4, Part 03, Claims Processing, Chapter 07, Restrictions on Training. For specific types of training, see Chapter 04 (*Facilities Offering Specific Types of Training*).

**b. Review Procedures.** ECSSs will need to verify the institution is properly adhering to their policy by granting credit for previous training by reviewing one or more of the following: *NOTE: The list is not all inclusive*

• Facilities’ prior credit policy  
• Transcripts  
• Degree audit checklist  
• Transfer credit evaluation

**COMPLIANCE SURVEY INDIVIDUAL CASE REVIEW CHECKLIST     
AREAS OF REVIEW 22-1934**

|  |  |
| --- | --- |
| **GENERAL** | **LINE  NO.** |
| Did Beneficiarey Commence on Date Certified | 2 |
| Is Beneficiary Enrolled in and Pursuing the Approved Program? | 3 |
| Is a Record of Previous Education and Training Maintained and was Beneficiary Granted Appropriate Credit? | 4 |
| Are Accurate, Current and Complete Records of Enrollment, Correspondence Lessons Serviced, Flight Training Hours or APP/OJT Hours Maintained for Beneficiary? | 5 |
| Were Enrollment Changes, Lessons Serviced, Flight Training Hours or APP/OJT Hours Accurately and Promptly Reported? | 6 |
| Was VA Promptly Notified when Beneficiary Terminated or Interrupted Training? | 7 |
| Are Accurate, Current and Complete Records of Progress or Grades (and Attendance, if required) Maintained for Beneficiary? | 8 |
| Was VA Promptly Notified when Beneficiary did not Progress Satisfactorily According to the Standards and Practices of the School or Training Establishment? | 9 |
| **ALL SCHOOLS EXCEPT TRAINING ESTABLISHMENTS** |  |
| Were Charges to Beneficiary for Tuition and Fees the Same as Charges to Other Students Similarly Circumstanced? | 10 |
| Was the 85 Percent Enrollment Limitation met at the time of Beneficiary’s Enrollment? | 11 |
| **ALL SCHOOLS EXCEPT FLIGHT SCHOOLS AND TRAINING ESTABLISHMENTS** |  |
| Was VA Promptly Notified of any Changes in Credit or Clock Hours that would Affect the Amount of Payment to the Beneficiary? | 12 |
| **NONACCREDITED COURSES ONLY (UNLESS PART OF THE APPROVAL CRITERIA FOR AN ACCREDITED COURSE)** |  |
| Was the Beneficiary furnished a Copy of the Course Outline, Schedule of Tuition, Fees and Other Charges, and Regulations pertaining to Attendance, Grading Policy, Conduct and Rules of Operation? | 13 |
| Was the Beneficiary’s Enrollment within the Limitation established by the State Approving Agency? | 14 |
| If Interrupted, did the Beneficiary receive a Refund that meets the Requirements of VA Regulations? | 15 |
| **CORRESPONDENCE SCHOOLS ONLY** |  |
| Did the Beneficiary Affirm the Enrollment Agreement after the Expiration of 10 full days after the day on which the Agreement was signed? | 16 |
| Were Supplies, if part of Approved Course, Furnished to Beneficiary? | 17 |
| Did Beneficiary Pay 100 Percent of the Established Charges? | 18 |
| Is the Normal Completion Time for the Approved Courses at least Six Months? | 19 |
| **FLIGHT SCHOOLS ONLY** |  |
| Did Beneficiary Hold a Private Pilot’s License or Higher Rating before Enrollment? | 20 |
| Did Beneficiary Hold a Current Medical Certificate of the Appropriate Class before and during Enrollment? | 21 |
| Did Beneficiary Pay 100 Percent of the Established Charges? | 22 |
| **TRAINING ESTABLISHMENTS ONLY** |  |
| Was Beneficiary Furnished a Copy of the Training Agreement? | 23 |
| Is Beneficiary Receiving Training in Accordance with the Approved Training Program? | 24 |
| Is Beneficiary Receiving Wages at the Appropriate Rate as shown in the Approved Training Program? | 25 |
| **ALL OTHER** |  |
| In Beneficiary’s Case, have Requirements of VA Regulations been met Concerning:       • Advertising and Sales Practices     • Power of Attorney     • Independent Study     • Practical Training     • Cooperative and Farm Cooperative Courses     • Branches     • Tutorial Assistance     • Owner/Officer Restriction     • Contractual Arrangements     • Advance Pay     • Non-duplication     • Any Other Areas | 27 A-L |

**Figure 3.04 Checklist for Individual Case Reviews**

**3.07 RECORDS AND REPORTS OF ENROLLMENT, CHANGES IN ENROLLMENT, AND TERMINATION OR INTERRUPTION. (38 USC 3680 and 3684(a))**

---

For additional information, please refer to M22-4, Part 01, General. Chapter 07, School Liability.

**a. Requirements.** Schools and training establishments must keep accurate, current and complete records of clock or credit hours of classes, correspondence lessons serviced, flight training hours completed, and apprenticeship/on-the-job hours worked. Periodic verification of the student's pursuit of the course may be required in some cases. In all cases, schools and training establishments must report accurately and promptly any enrollment or reenrollment, any increase or decreases in the rate of pursuit, and any termination or interruption. In most situations, a report must be made within 30 days of the date of any change, termination, or interruption in order to be considered prompt. ([38 CFR 21.4203](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=494448edfca3017d3d71303c1e02e609&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14203)) Schools and training establishments may delay in reporting this information until the end of the term, quarter, or semester when either

• The claimant is enrolled in a program of independent study;  
• The claimant is pursuing the program on a less than half-time basis;  
• The educational institution has asked the Director of the RPO of jurisdiction in writing for permission to delay in making the report; and  
• The Director of the RPO of jurisdiction has determined that it is not feasible for the educational institution to monitor interruption or termination of the claimant’s pursuit of the program.

*NOTE: This is based on when the claimant MADE the change, not when the SCO discovered or was informed of the change.*

**b. Review Procedures.** Review school or training establishment records to determine if they are adequate to identify enrollment, rate of pursuit, and termination or interruption. Determine if reports were made accurately and promptly. For specific types of training, see M22-4, Part 10, Compliance Survey, Chapter 04, Procedures Applicable to Facilities Offering Specific Types of Training.

**3.08 RECORDS AND REPORTS OF PROGRESS, CONDUCT, OR ATTENDANCE (38 USC 3674, 3675(b) and 3676(c))**

---

**a. Requirements.** Schools and training establishments must keep accurate, current and complete records to show progress toward the student's objective, and must establish and enforce standards related to progress, conduct, and in certain cases, attendance. Schools and training establishments must report accurately and promptly when, in accordance with the school's official standards, a student fails to maintain satisfactory progress, conduct, or attendance. Generally, a report must be made within 30 days of the date progress, conduct or attendance became unsatisfactory in order to be considered prompt. ([38 CFR 21.4203(h)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=494448edfca3017d3d71303c1e02e609&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14203)). Exceptions to this are rare. ECSSs should discuss with the CELO for clarifications. For specific types of training, see M22-4, Part 10, Compliance Survey, Chapter 04, Procedures Applicable to Facilities Offering Specific Types of Training.

**b. Review Procedures.** Review school and training establishment records to determine whether they are adequate to identify when progress, conduct or attendance are satisfactory. If an individual student's progress, conduct or attendance has been unsatisfactory, determine the date the school's standard was not met. Determine if reports were made accurately and promptly. For specific types of training, see M22-4, Part 10, Compliance Survey. Chapter 04, Procedures Applicable to Facilities Offering Specific Types of Training.

**3.09 QUESTIONABLE ADVERTISING, SALES, OR ENROLLMENT PRACTICES**

---

This section provides information about advertising practices that may occur at schools and training establishments that are not permissible at approved schools. ECSSs are required to look for evidence of such practices during compliance reviews.

**a. Advertising Containing Avocational or Recreational Themes.** Approval of courses which are avocational or recreational in character is not allowed. ([38 USC 3473(a)(3)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3473 edition:prelim)) and [38 USC 3523(a)(3)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3523 edition:prelim))) However, even though a course or its advertising may contain significant avocational or recreational themes, the course may remain approved if each claimant enrolled submits justification showing that the course will be of bona fide use in the pursuit of his or her contemplated business or occupation. ([38 CFR 21.4252(b)(4)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=e3997ae923c49acc84ff548c052b84ad&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14252)).

ECSSs should look for signs of advertising that contains significant avocational or recreational themes. The intent is to monitor those courses that, though leading to a predetermined and identified educational, vocational, or professional goal, are advertised as though their purpose is recreational or avocational. Avocational or recreational advertising examples may include the following:

• Advertising for a course leading to the vocation of computer repair also suggests that enrollment will enable the student to obtain a personal computer, principally paid for by VA benefits, to assemble in his or her leisure time  
• Advertising notes that the student can acquire skills with which to repair his or her personal appliances or stereo sound system, or which will present an opportunity for part-time (i.e., avocational) income  
• Advertising emphasizes the monetary benefits to be directly gained from receiving VA benefits over the cost of the course, rather than the declared goal of the course (i.e., the educational, professional, or vocational objective)

**b. Review of Advertising on School Premises.** ECSSs should review advertising used on school premises as well as in local and national media for such themes. The school may use the following forms of advertising:

• Radio or TV announcement  
• Advertisements in newspapers  
• Weekly or monthly periodicals  
• Yellow Pages telephone listings  
• Institution’s website

If such themes are found, review student records for justification showing that the course will be of genuine use in the pursuit of the intended business or occupation.

**c. Erroneous, Deceptive or Misleading Advertising, Sales or Enrollment Practices.** ([38 CFR 21.4252(h)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=774cb732b1388a15b78605ac872c93ad&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14252)) The prohibition of deceptive advertising is part of the approval criteria for nonaccredited courses ([38 USC 3676(c)(10)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3676 edition:prelim))). In addition, [38 USC 3696](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3696 edition:prelim)) provides that no enrollment will be approved at schools or training establishments utilizing advertising, sales or enrollment practices of any type that are false, deceptive or misleading either by actual statement, omission or intimation.

All approved schools and training establishments must maintain complete records and copies of all advertising, sales and enrollment materials used by them or on their behalf for a period of 12 months. These materials must be available for inspection by the SAA and by VA. These materials include, but are not limited to the following:

• Any direct mail pieces  
• Brochures  
• Printed literature used by sales people  
• Any form of electronic media  
• Material disseminated through print media  
• Tear sheets of print advertisements  
• Leaflets  
• Handbills  
• Fliers  
• Any sales or recruitment manuals used to instruct sales personnel, agents, or representatives of the school or training establishment

Any school or training establishment which uses advertising, sales or enrollment practices of any type that are false, deceptive or misleading will be barred from further enrollments and no certificates of eligibility will be issued for any courses at the school or training establishment.

The phrase "advertising, sales, or enrollment practices" encompasses any method used or action taken by a school or training establishment, its personnel, agents, or representatives to solicit or encourage enrollment in its course(s) of study, whether or not enrollment actually occurs as a result of those practices. It is not possible to catalog all violations that could occur under [38 CFR 21.4252(h)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=774cb732b1388a15b78605ac872c93ad&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14252), or even all the deceptive practices that have occurred in the past.

**3.10 GUIDELINES FOR REVIEWING ADVERTISEMENT PRACTICES**

---

The guidelines below are offered as points of emphasis in reviewing school and training establishment practices, and should by no means be considered all-inclusive.

**a. Advertising.** Advertising must not leave a false, misleading, or exaggerated impression concerning any of the following:

• the school or training establishment  
• School personnel  
• Course(s) and services  
• Occupational opportunities for its graduates

Advertising claims that might be construed as literally true must be literally true. Words that might mislead, confuse, be subject to easy misunderstanding, or have a double meaning should not be used. Advertising should be written to its anticipated readership; people who are unsophisticated about the traditional language used in education.

EXAMPLE 1: The school guarantees employment placement service after graduation, but in reality, simply provides the student with a list of employers to contact.

EXAMPLE 2: Advertising implies extensive employment connections with nationwide firms when such connections do not exist.

EXAMPLE 3: Testimonials from graduates convey the impression that typical students obtain jobs or high earnings, but the testimonials are fictitious or represent only a small percentage of students.

**b. Sales or Enrollment.** Sales or enrollment practices can be more subtly deceptive or misleading, mainly because statements may not be documented, and cannot be as easily reviewed as advertisements. Problems may involve the following:  
 

• Misrepresentation of the size or experience of the school  
• School affiliation with well-known companies or training programs  
• Quality of the training or instructional materials  
• Qualifications of instructors, or of the availability of expert instructors

**EXAMPLE 1**: Advertising indicates that VA has approved the training/facility.

**EXAMPLE 2**: The salesperson misrepresents himself or herself as a VA employee or a VA educational consultant.

**EXAMPLE 3:** The enrollment agreement or contract was not fully explained to the student before he or she signed it.

**c. Advertising, Sales, or Enrollment by Omission.** Advertisements, sales or enrollment practices can be erroneous, deceptive or misleading by omission as well as by actual statement or intimation. Such omissions include the failure to disclose any material fact concerning the school or its instruction which may reasonably affect the student's decision to enroll. Catalogs and other materials published by the school should clearly disclose, in advance of enrollment, any ordinary limitations and restrictions on admissions and employment, such as the following:

• Medical  
• Age  
• Education and experience requirements  
• Need for examinations, licensing, internship, apprenticeship, or union membership.

**EXAMPLE 1**: The school indicates that its courses are creditable toward a degree, when, in fact, the transfer of credit is severely limited.

**EXAMPLE 2**: A salesperson states that there are "thousands of jobs open" in a particular field, without mentioning that the jobs require relocation to an isolated part of the country, or that the school's graduates do not qualify for such jobs.

The following sales and enrollment practices are hereby held to be deceptive and misleading in all cases:

• Obtaining any form or document signed in blank by the student.  
• Any statement or action which tends to defeat the purpose of the affirmation period for correspondence courses.

Many other advertising, sales or enrollment practices are questionable. As part of the compliance survey, the ECSS should do the following:

• Review the school's advertising in local and national media  
• During student interviews, ask students about the school’s enrollment practices and sales techniques

If a school's advertising, sales, or enrollment practices appear to be in violation of the provisions of the law, fully document the facts to the extent practicable during the survey, refer with full details to the SAA (Refer to M22-4, Part 10, Compliance Survey, Chapter 06, Referrals, Section 6.01) and include the findings in the compliance survey report.

**3.11 RECRUITING PRACTICES**

---

The Secretary shall not approve any course offered by an educational institution if the educational institution provides any commission, bonus, or other incentive payment based directly or indirectly on success in securing enrollments or financial aid to any persons or entities engaged in any student recruiting or admission activities or in making decisions regarding the award of student financial assistance ([38 USC 3696(d)(1)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3696 edition:prelim))).

**3.12 GI BILL ® TRADEMARK**

---

The GI Bill Trademark is owned by VA and registered with the US Patent and Trademark Office as of October 16, 2012 (VBA Letter 20-14-04). VA trademarked the term to stop deceptive and misleading promotional efforts targeting GI Bill educational benefits under direction from Executive Order 13607.

The GI Bill trademark covers “education benefits, namely, financial assistance such as accelerated payment and tuition assistance for institutions of higher learning, non-college degree programs, on-the-job training and apprenticeship training, flight training, independent training, distance learning and internet training, correspondence training, national testing programs, licensing and certification; entrepreneurship training, work-study programs, and co-op training to Veterans, Service members, National Guard members, Selected Reserve members, and eligible dependents.”

**a. Authorized Third Parties.** Third-party use of the trademark is restricted to education and training institutions eligible to receive VA education benefits, SAAs, and recognized Veterans service organizations. Third parties not identified are prohibited from using GI Bill in any manner that directly or indirectly implies a relationship, affiliation, or endorsement with the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs.

Authorized third parties are subject to the following terms of use:

1. When using “GI Bill,” the registered trademark symbol (®) must be included at the upper right corner of the trademark and the following trademark attribution notice must be prominently visible: "GI Bill®” is a registered trademark of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).

2. The GI Bill trademark is not to be incorporated or included in company or product names, trademarks, logos or internet domain names.

3. The term “GI Bill®” is to be used solely to promote official VA benefit programs and services and must include the proper trademark symbol.

4. Use of the trademark attribution notice, indicating that the mark and all associated services belong to VA, is required and shall be taken as evidence that use of the mark is in good faith.

5. No entity shall use the GI Bill trademark in any manner that directly or indirectly implies a relationship, affiliation, or association with VA that does not exist.

6. Disparagement or misrepresentations of VA services through use of the mark, or by the use of confusingly similar wording, are strictly prohibited.

7. VA reserves the right to bring action against any party that violates VA’s terms-of-use concerning the trademark in Federal court.

**b. Reporting Violations.** VBA personnel shall report suspected violations via email to [GI-Bill.Trademark@va.gov](mailto:GI-Bill.Trademark@va.gov) and provide the following information:

* Facility Code
* Institution Name
* Institution Point of Contact (POC)
* Institution Address
* Institution Email Address
* Effective Date of Incident
* Website Link
* Screen Shots of Incident, if available
* Education Liaison Representative (ELR) Email
* State Approving Agency (SAA) Email

ECSSs should notify the school or training establishment if a violation of the trademark has been found or suspected. They should use a version of [Figure 3.05](#f305) Sample Violation Notification Letter

Dear School Certifying Official:

We have recently been made aware that \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ has engaged in using the GI Bill® trademark in electronic format through advertisement on your facility’s website. Veteran students and their dependents cannot be reimbursed VA Education benefits for training pursued at your facility because your institution has not sought the required approval through the \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ State Approving Agency.

In addition to promoting a program on your website that is not eligible for VA benefits, your use of the phrase “GI Bill®” violates our trademark of that term. Our Terms of Use are published on our website at http://www.benefits.va.gov/GIBILL/Trademark\_Terms\_of\_Use.asp .

Third-party use of the trademark is restricted to the education and training institutions eligible to receive VA education benefits. Additionally, your use of the phrase “GI Bill” infringes on our ownership rights. We request that you cease all use of the mark consisting of the wording “GI Bill.” Please be advised that VA must make this request in order to preserve the value of our trademark.

We would appreciate your assurance within thirty (30) days from the date of this letter and that you comply with the Terms of Use for the phrase “GI Bill.”

You may contact \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, Chief Education Liaison Officer at ( ) \_\_\_-\_\_\_\_\_ if you have questions.

Thank you in advance for your assistance.

[Name]

Survey Specialist

ADDRESS

**Figure 3.05 Sample Violation Notification Letter**

**3.13 POWER OF ATTORNEY/NON-ASSIGNABILITY OF BENEFITS** ([38 USC 5301(a)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:5301 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4146](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=774cb732b1388a15b78605ac872c93ad&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14146))

---

This section describes the requirement that prohibits schools and training establishments from negotiating VA educational assistance benefit payments and the review procedures that must occur during a compliance survey.

**a. Requirements.** All VA educational assistance payments must be negotiated by the claimant. Schools and training establishments may not negotiate VA educational assistance checks. A power of attorney giving the school or training establishment authority to negotiate benefit checks is prohibited. Schools and training establishments may not obtain indirect access to the proceeds of educational assistance checks (may not directly receive) or electronic funds transfers.

If checks (including advance pay) are mailed to a school address, they must be mailed to the school location which the student is attending. Checks may not be mailed to one school location for further distribution to other locations of the school.

The school must be able to properly safeguard checks and deliver them to students. Advance pay checks that cannot be delivered to the student within 30 days after classes begin must be returned in the unopened envelope to the U.S. Treasury return address. Monthly benefit checks mailed to a school address must be returned in the unopened envelope to U.S. Treasury within 30 days if the student fails to call for the check.

*NOTE: This is not applicable to Chapter 33 Tuition, Fee, and Yellow Ribbon payments.*

**b. Review Procedures.** If the school has agreed to receive advance pay checks for delivery to students, the ECSS should review the school's procedures for safekeeping of the checks and delivery to students. If monthly benefit checks for any student in the survey sample are mailed to a school or training establishment address, determine through interviews with the school or training establishment officials, and optional student interviews that the school does not have a power of attorney or any form of direct or indirect access to the proceeds of such checks.

Although the student may endorse the check and return it to the school or training establishment to satisfy a debt, this action must be entirely voluntary. Any practice which has the effect of controlling the student's disposition of the check is not permitted. For example, it is illegal for school personnel to remove a check from the envelope and stamp “for deposit only” to a school account.

The practice of mailing checks or sending electronic funds transfers to a bank account held jointly by the student and the school is also prohibited.

During the review of addresses for the purpose of enforcing the prohibition against assignment, be alert for patterns of beneficiary addresses which may indicate the possibility of fraud.

EXAMPLES:  
  
•The same address is used for many students.  
•Many addresses are beyond the normal commuting distance.

---

SEE ATTACHMENTS BELOW TO VIEW CHANGES MADE TO THIS M22-4 CHAPTER