# Sub-Chapter 1 Instutions of Higher Learning

**Sub-Chapter 1. Institutions of Higher Learning (IHL)**

This page explains approved programs at IHLs, and provides an overview of Chapter 33 benefits for service members who choose to go to an IHL. On this page you can find out more about:

[1.01 Approved Institutions of Higher Learning](#101)

[1.02 Benefit Payment Details](#102)

[1.03 Credit Hours](#103)

[1.04 Attending More than One IHL at a Time](#104)

[1.05 Pursuing More than One Degree at a Time](#105)

[1.06 Obtaining Additional Degrees](#106)

 

**1.01 Approved Programs at Institutions of Higher Learning (IHLs)**

---

**a. IHLs**

Education benefits are available for attendance in approved programs at IHLs. An IHL is a college, university, or a degree-granting school. These types of schools include:

* Four-year colleges and universities
* Community colleges granting associate’s degrees
* Professional schools, such as a law school or a medical school
* Technical or business schools

The school may be recognized as an IHL if it is empowered by the appropriate State Approving Agency (SAA) under state law to grant an associate-level or higher degree or if it is accredited for degree programs by a recognized accrediting agency. This may include a hospital offering educational programs at the postsecondary level without regard to whether the hospital grants a postsecondary degree.

It may also include an educational institution outside of the United States. The educational institution must offer courses leading to a standard college degree or equivalent, and it must be recognized as an educational institution by the secretary of education (or similar official) of the country or other jurisdiction where it is located. 

 

***Sources***

Electronic Code of Federal Regulations, [§ 21.9505   Definitions. Institution of Higher Learning](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_19505)

**1.02 Benefit Payment Details**

---

**a. Post-9/11 GI Bill benefits** are paid for IHLs as follows:

* Tuition and fees are paid directly to the school and are pro-rated based on the individual’s benefit level.
* A Books and Supplies Stipend of up to $1,000 per academic year (pro-rated based on the individual’s benefit level) is paid to the student based on the number of credits in which he/she is enrolled in for each term.
* A Monthly Housing Allowance based on the Department of Defense’s (DoD’s) Basic Allowance for Housing (BAH) rate for the school’s ZIP Code [pro-rated based on the Rate of Pursuit (RoP) and individual’s benefit level]. It is paid to the student and re-released for each month of attendance until the end date of each term.
* Yellow Ribbon payments are paid directly to the school if the individual is eligible at the 100% benefit level, the charges exceed the tuition and fees payable, and the IHL is a Yellow Ribbon program participant.

**b. Public IHLs**

For in-state students at a public IHL, all net tuition and fee charges are covered under the benefit.

**c. Private and Foreign IHLs**

For private and foreign IHLs, tuition and fee reimbursement is capped at an annual maximum  to [Hyperlink to GI Bill Rate Tables] per academic year .

**d. Grandfathered Tuition and Fee Rates**

Grandfathered students are covered under the Restoring GI Bill Fairness Act of 2011. This law allows the VA to pay more than the annual maximum for tuition and fees for certain students attending private colleges and universities in seven states - Arizona, Michigan, New Hampshire, New York, Pennsylvania, South Carolina and Texas.

In order to qualify for the higher payments an individual must:

* Have pursued training at a private IHL in one of the seven specified states,
* Been a veteran or service member as of January 4, 2011.
* Have been enrolled in a program of education that had tuition and fee charges exceeding the $17,500 cap for full-time attendance for the 2010-2011 academic year and,
* Have been enrolled in the same private institution since January 4, 2011.

Learn more about monetary benefits of the Post-9/11 GI Bill .

 ***Sources***

[PL 110-252](https://www.congress.gov/110/plaws/publ252/PLAW-110publ252.pdf), Chapter 33 Post-9/11 Educational Assistance, Subchapter II Educational Assistance, Section 3313. Educational assistance: amount; payment [Hyperlink to Document]

[PL 111-377](https://www.congress.gov/111/plaws/publ377/PLAW-111publ377.pdf), Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act of 2010, Title II Other Educational Assistance Matters, Section 102. Amounts of Assistance for Programs of Education Leading to a Degree Pursued at Public, Non-public, and Foreign Institutions of Higher Learning [Hyperlink to Document]

**1.03 Credit Hours**

---

**a. Rate of Pursuit**

Payment amounts for the monthly housing allowance are based on the Rate of Pursuit (RoP):

* RoP is calculated by dividing the amount of credits in which the individual is enrolled by the amount of credits required for full-time attendance.
* Equivalent Credit Hours are used for calculating the RoP for non-standard terms.

*Note: The amount of credits required for full-time training can vary by school and/or program. Claims processors must check WEAMS for the full-time modifier for each enrollment certification if it’s not pre-populated through the LTS/WEAMS interface.*

**b. Graduate Training**

For graduate-level courses, the full-time training requirement is generally set by IHL. For example, if a 2-credit class is considered full-time in a graduate program at the school being attended, the VA will pay the full-time rate for enrollment in 2 credits.

***Sources***

[PL 111-377](https://www.congress.gov/111/plaws/publ377/PLAW-111publ377.pdf), Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act of 2010, Title II Other Educational Assistance Matters, Section 102. Amounts of Assistance for Programs of Education Leading to a Degree Pursued at Public, Non-public, and Foreign Institutions of Higher Learning [Hyperlink to Document]

Electronic Code of Federal Regulations [§ 21.9640   Rates of payment of educational assistance](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_19640)

Electronic Code of Federal Regulations [§ 21.9505   Definitions](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_19505)  

**1.04 Attending More than One IHL at a Time**

---

**a.** **Multiple Schools**

An individual can attend more than one school at a time, as long as the programs at each institution are approved and the classes count toward program completion. The school granting the degree (or primary school) must accept the credits taken at the secondary school as part of the course requirements. However, VA will not pay for a student to take the same classes twice unless the student receives a failing grade and the class is required for graduation.

**1.05 Pursuing More than One Degree at a Time**

---

**a. Multiple Degrees**

The GI Bill can pay for more than one degree, as long as they are generally recognized as being reasonably related to a single career field.

For example, a claimant can get benefits for a degree in accounting and a degree in accounting as a dual major. Or the student can get paid benefits for a program involving a related major field and minor field where the student is required to extend the length of his or her program beyond what is normally required for graduation.

**1.06 Obtaining Additional Degrees**

---

**a. Additional Degrees**

Once an individual has obtained a degree, he or she could pursue another program as long as they have sufficient entitlement.

For example, a claimant can get benefits for a bachelor’s degree in business and then for a second bachelor’s degree in computer science. Or that student can get paid benefits for sequentially higher degrees in the same field, such as an associate’s and bachelor’s degree in business, or a bachelor’s and master’s degree in education.

 

***Sources***

Electronic Code of Federal Regulations [§ 21.4234   Change of program](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14234)

Electronic Code of Federal Regulations [§ 21.9505   Definitions: Program of Education](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_1)