# Sub-Chapter 8. Licensing and Certification

**Sub-Chapter 8. Licensing and Certification**

In many professions it is advantageous or required to have a federal license, state license, or a professional certification. VA may reimburse an individual for taking an approved licensing or certification test.

 **a. Benefit Payment Details**

VA may pay for the cost of a test, up to $2,000.00, even if the individual doesn’t pass.  Payment is sent after the individual submits proof of payment to VA.

No other fees may be paid in connection with getting a license or certification. VA may not reimburse for registration fees, preparation guides, processing fees, etc.

**b. Reimbursement**

To receive benefits, an individual must send a copy of his or her test results, a receipt for proof of payment, and a completed VA Form 22-0803 requesting reimbursement. The following information must be included in the request:

* Name and Social Security number
* Name of the test or certification taken
* Date the test was taken
* Name and address of the organization issuing the license or certificate (not necessarily the organization that gave the test)
* Cost of the test (NOTE: Registration fees, preparation guides, processing fees, etc., will not be reimbursed)
* The following statement, signed by the claimant on the application: "I authorize release of my test information to VA."

**c. Approved Tests**

You can search for approved Licensing and Certification tests in WEAMS.

**d. Entitlement Charge**

Under the Post-9/11 GI Bill, entitlement is deducted based on the cost of the test divided by a statutorily mandated amount for the academic year in which the test is taken. The statutorily mandated amount for the academic year can be found on the [Post-9/11 GI Bill (Chapter 33) rates page](https://www.va.gov/education/benefit-rates/post-9-11-gi-bill-rates/).

To be reimbursed, the claimant must have filed a claim for education benefits.

***Sources***

Electronic Code of Federal Regulations [**§ 21.9665 Reimbursement for licensing or certification tests**](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_19665)

[**PL 111-377**](https://www.congress.gov/111/plaws/publ377/PLAW-111publ377.pdf), Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements Act of 2010, Title II Other Educational Assistance Matters, Section 105. Educational Assistance for Programs of Education Other than Programs of Education Leading to a Degree

Training Slides PL111-377