# Part 3: Chapter 9 - Certificates of Eligibility and Disallowances

**Part 3: Chapter 9 - Certificates of Eligibility and Disallowances**

 

**[Subchapter 1.](#SI) Issuing Certificates of Eligibility**  
[9.01 Use of VA Form 22-1993a, Certificate of Eligibility](#901)  
[9.02 Conditional Certificates of Eligibility](#902)  
[9.03 Supporting Documentation and Authorization](#903)  
  
**[Subchapter 2](#SII). Disallowances**  
[9.04 Notification of Disallowances](#904)  
[9.05 Disallowance Letters](#905)  
[9.06 Appellate Rights](#906)  
[9.07 Non-System Disallowances](#907)  
[9.08 Record Purpose Disallowances](#908)  
[9.09 Documentation of Disallowances](#909)  
  
**Figures**  
[9.01 Completed VA Form 22-1993a](#f901)  
[9.02 Sample Chapter 32 Disallowance Letter (Denial Reason Code 95, Contributions Refunded)](#f902)  
9.03 Sample Chapter 32 Disallowance Letter (Denial Reason Code 97, No Contributions)  
9.04 Sample Chapter 35 Disallowance Letter (Denial Reason Code 29, No Veteran Claim)  
9.05 Sample Chapter 35 Disallowance Letter (Denial Reason Code 10, Veteran Less Than 100% Service-Connected)  
9.06 Sample Chapter 35 Disallowance Letter (Denial Reason Code 06, Veteran's Death Not Service-Connected)  
9.07 Sample Chapter 1606 Disallowance Letter (Basic Eligibility Not Established)  
9.08 Sample Disapproval Letter (Course Not Approved - SAA Approval Required)  
9.09 Sample Disapproval Letter (Course Not Approved - VA Approval Required)  
9.10 Sample Disapproval Letter (Course Not Approvable)

 

**SUBCHAPTER I.  ISSUING CERTIFICATES OF ELIGIBILITY**

**9.01  USE OF VA FORM 22-1993A, CERTIFICATE OF ELIGIBILITY**

---

Procedures in this subchapter are for [all programs except chapter 30.  Chapter 30 procedures are in [M22-4 Part 5: Chapter 2 - MGIB BDN Processing](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000076230?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&),  paragraph 2.09.]

**a.  General.** Use VA Form 22-1993a to inform a claimant of eligibility to education assistance benefits.  Issue a VA Form 22-1993a to an applicant when eligibility and entitlement to education benefits exist but no enrollment certification is of record.  Do not develop for an enrollment certification without issuing a Certificate of Eligibility (COE) to the claimant.  [Alternately, generate the information contained on this form using word processing.  If stations use this alternate processing, any word processing document must contain all information required on VA Form 22-1993a.  If this form is updated, the word rocessing document must reflect all changes reflected on the revised form.]

**b.  Completion.**   (See [RPO Letter 22-07-01](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000062304?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) ) A VA Form 22-1993a is an official notification of a claimant's eligibility to benefits.  Complete the form accurately (see [fig. 9.01](#f901)).  Complete the form by hand at local management discretion.  If the Certificate of Eligibility is hand-written, use black ink and write legibly.

(1)  Enter the claimant's Veterans Affairs (VA) file number (with suffix for chapter 35 cases) [and the date issued] in the upper right corner of VA Form 22-1993a.  Enter  the claimant's name and address beginning at the dot in the upper left of the form.  Use a window envelope to mail the form.

(2)  In the first line of the form, enter the law under which the claimant has established eligibility to benefits.  For example, enter "Chapter 1606, Title 10" or "Chapter 32, Title 38."  If necessary, cross out "Chapter, Title, and U.S.C."  For example, substitute "Section 903, Public Law 96-342" if eligibility for section 903 benefits is the issue. 

(3)  Check the sentence below the first paragraph which properly identifies the claimant and fill in the blank spaces with the proper entries.  Make any necessary changes to preprinted data. 

(4)  For other than servicepersons, always check the last box below the first paragraph.  This will advise the claimant of his or her delimiting date.  If the claim is for chapter 1606 benefits add:   "However, your entitlement will end if you leave the Selected Reserve."

(5)  Enter the final objective, course or courses, and name and address of the facility at which the student will pursue training.  The objective, course and facility must be approved.  See [paragraph 6.05] for procedures on approval requirements.

(i)  If the claimant did not specify a school, course, or objective, leave the corresponding section of the form blank and check box 1 on the form.

(ii)  If the claim is for an unapproved objective or course, [do not issue a VA Form 22-1993a.  See [subchapter II](#SII).]

(6)  Use VA Form 22-1993a to inform the claimant of any limitations that apply because of changes of program or unsatisfactory progress.  If an additional limitation(s) applies, check the proper block(s) at the bottom of the form.  If the issue is reentry into training following unsatisfactory progress, enter the date of reentry in the blank at that sentence.

COPY OF VA FORM 22-1993A

**Figure 9.01.  Completed VA Form 22-1993a**

**c.  Disposition.**  Send the original (copy 1) and the first carbon copy (copy 2) of VA Form 22-1993a [(or the word processing equivalent)] to the claimant.  File copy 3 on the right side of the claimant's folder.  Enclose a carbon set of VA Form 22-1999, Enrollment Certification, with the VA Form 22-1993a before mailing. 

**9.02  CONDITIONAL CERTIFICATES OF ELIGIBILITY**

---

There are some situations in which eligibility or entitlement exists but may change in the future.  In these cases, issue a VA Form 22-1993a and explain the circumstances in [box 5 of the June 1993 or August 1994 versions of the] form.

**a.  Dual Entitlement.** If a claimant has entitlement under two education benefit programs, use [box 5 of the June 1993 or August 1994 versions of the form] to explain the 48 month entitlement limitation.  [ ]

(1)  If the claimant has entitlement under two programs but has not used the other program [or has used less entitlement than the amount needed to reduce entitlement under the current program, check box 5 of the June 1993 or August 1994 versions of the form and enter "You also have entitlement to benefits under the (enter program) education benefit program.  You cannot use more than 48 months of combined entitlement under more than one program.  The entitlement shown above may be less if you use benefits under the (enter program) program."  Alter the last sentence appropriately if the claimant has used some entitlement in the other program.]

(2)  If the claimant has entitlement under two benefit programs and has used entitlement under the other program [sufficient to reduce entitlement under the current program, check box 5 of the June 1993 or August 1994 versions and enter "Your entitlement has been reduced by the (enter months, days) of entitlement you have used under the (enter program) program.  You cannot use more than 48 months of combined entitlement under more than one education benefit program.  Therefore, your use of additional benefits under the (enter program) program will] reduce your entitlement."

**b.  Chapter 1606 120-Day Cases.**  See [Part 7: Chapter 3 - Eligibility Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073695?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)  [paragraph 3.04,] for a description of the 120-day exceptions for chapter 1606.  If enrollment information is not available when one of these occurs, issue a VA Form 22-1993a.  Explain the exception in [box 5 of the June 1993 or August 1994 versions] of the form.

(1)  For claims received with no enrollment information within 120 days of the date of eligibility, check [box 5 of the June 1993 or August 1994 versions of the form].  Enter "VA has not yet received evidence of your eligibility from the (enter claimant's Selected Reserve component).  VA will pay benefits based on this certificate only if we receive a VA Form 22-1999, Enrollment Certification, from your school before (enter date 120 days from date of eligibility shown on DD Form 2384).  We will pay benefits only for periods before that date until we receive your eligibility information."

(2)  For claims received with no enrollment information, but with an override indicator on the DOD (Department of Defense) screen (eligibility status of ELIGIBLE-UPDATE PENDING), check [box 5 of the June 1993 or August 1994 versions of the form].  Enter "This is a temporary certificate of eligibility.  VA will pay benefits based on this certificate only if we receive a VA Form 22-1999, Enrollment Certification, from your school before (enter date 120 days after the LAST ACTIVITY DATE on the DOD screen)."

**9.03  SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION AND AUTHORIZATION**

---

**a.** Issuing a VA Form 22-1993a on an original claim is equivalent to processing an award.  Therefore, there must be documentation to support the decision.  Also, an authorizer must approve the determination.  The required documentation differs by program.

(1)  Chapter 32 and Section 903.  File a print of a completed Chapter 32 Eligibility (310) screen on the left side of the claims [or education] folder.

(2)  Chapter 35.  File a print of a completed Chapter 35 Eligibility (311) screen [ ] on the left side of the Dependent Education Assistance (DEA) folder.  Send a copy of the documentation to the claims folder.

(3)  Chapter 1606.  File a print of the DOD screen in the center of the claims [or the left side of the education] folder.

**b**.  [All Certificates of Eligibility that show an original basic eligibility determination or a change in basic eligibility must be reviewed and signed by a second individual.  The file must contain evidence of the authorization.]

(1)  Original Claims.  The [second individual] will sign the supporting document, described above, before releasing the VA Form 22-1993a to the claimant.

(2)  Supplemental Claims.  [If the supplemental claim involves a change in basic eligibility, a second individual] must sign the bottom of the file copy of the VA Form 22-1993a before releasing it to the claimant. 

**SUBCHAPTER II.  DISALLOWANCES**

**9.04  NOTIFICATION OF DISALLOWANCES**

---

Procedures in this subchapter apply to all VA educational assistance programs.  VA must provide claimants and their representatives notice of all decisions VA makes about a claim for benefits.  [(Also see [Part 4: Chapter 13 - Miscellaneous Award Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073684?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) paragraph 13.15, for due process notice in adverse action cases.)  Each notice of a disallowance must include an explanation of the procedure for getting a review of the decision, a statement of the reasons for the decision, and a summary of the evidence that led to the decision.]

**a.  Benefit Disallowed.**  Provide notice for any benefit that is disallowed, including tutorial assistance and education loans.

**b.  Disallowance Reason.**  Provide the reasons for all disallowances, including basic eligibility factors, program approvals, or reentrances after unsatisfactory progress, etc.  If there is more than one disallowance reason, the notice must explain all reasons.

**9.05  DISALLOWANCE LETTERS**

---

[BDN generated disallowance letters can be used for chapter 30 only.  (See [Part 4: Chapter 13 - Miscellaneous Award Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073684?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) paragraph 13.15d.)  If BDN generated letters cannot be used, see the sample disallowance letters shown in [figures 9.02](#f902) through 9.07.  See figures 9.08 through 9.10 for sample notice letters when the course is not approved or is not approvable.]  Use the sample letters provided only for the purpose intended.  DO NOT try to fit every denial into the samples provided.  If the circumstances in an individual case warrant a dictated letter, compose a letter appropriate for the issue involved.  [ ]

**9.06  APPELLATE RIGHTS**

---

Each disallowance notice must include an explanation of the procedures for appealing the disallowance. 

**a.  VA Form 4107.**  Attach a VA Form 4107, Notice of Procedural and Appellate Rights, to all disallowance letters.  Usually, the VA Form 4107 will be adequate notice of procedures for appealing a decision.

**b.  Chapter 1606 Eligibility Disallowances.** DOD makes basic eligibility determinations for the chapter 1606 program.  Therefore, the Board of Veterans Appeals cannot reverse a determination that a claimant is not eligible for chapter 1606 benefits.  However, the claimant does have the right to appeal the VA disallowance action based on the DOD eligibility determination.  Therefore, the disallowance letter must, in addition to the VA Form 4107, contain a clear statement that only the claimant's Selected Reserve component can change the eligibility determination.  Do not mislead the claimant into thinking that the Board of Veterans Appeals can resolve an eligibility disagreement.  See part VIII, [paragraph 3.10].

**9.07  NON-SYSTEM DISALLOWANCES**

---

Whenever possible, process disallowances on the Benefits Delivery Network (BDN) system.  However, there are some situations for which a system disallowance cannot be done. 

**a.** [For chapter 35 disallowances, use BDN to document the disallowance action but do not create a BDN master record.  (See [Part 7: Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073737?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) paragraph 4.02.) 

**b.**  A BDN disallowance cannot be done if a master record exists in chapter 32, 35, or 1606.  A disallowance on a supplemental claim for an unapproved school is an example of this type of case.] 

**c.**  [BDN will not permit disallowances for claims for benefits other than educational assistance allowance.  When disallowing a claim for tutorial assistance or an education loan, send the claimant a notification letter and appellate rights.]

**d.** If a chapter 35 master record for a spouse or surviving spouse exists and a second spouse or surviving spouse claims benefits but is not eligible, send disallowance notification.  Do not process a BDN disallowance.]

**9.08  RECORD PURPOSE DISALLOWANCES**

---

A record purpose disallowance is one that does not require notification.  A disallowance for failure to prosecute is not a record purpose disallowance.  Provide proper notification to the claimant when disallowing a claim due to failure to submit evidence.  [A record purpose disallowance is proper only when the claimant's address is unknown.  However, when the claimant provides a new address, reissue any development letters or send a disallowance notice.

*NOTE:  If it is necessary to develop an original chapter 1606 claim, establish a "J" type master record in BDN by processing a disallowance.  See* [Part 8: Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000075562?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) *paragraph 4.02, for these procedures.  By establishing a master record in these cases, BDN communicates to the claimant's component that a claim exists.  The "J" master record permits the exchanging of information between DOD and VA concerning any changes in the claimant's eligibility.  This is not a disallowance of benefits.  Do not send a disallowance notice, but explain the circumstances in the development letter.]*

**9.09  DOCUMENTATION OF DISALLOWANCES**

---

A copy of the BDN generated disallowance is documentation of the disallowance.  A copy of the notification letter, signed or initialed by the preparer and, if appropriate, the authorizer will document non-system disallowances.  See [ [Part 3: Chapter 1 - Administrative Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073486?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) paragraph 1.32] for those cases that require second review or authorization.

 

IN REPLY REFER TO:                

FILE NUMBER: XXX-XX-XXXX

We have carefully reviewed your claim for education benefits under the Post-Vietnam Era Veterans' Educational Assistance Program (Chapter 32).

Your claim for education benefits under this program is denied because you do not meet the eligibility requirement(s) described below.

To be eligible for this education benefit, a person must have contributed money to the Post-Vietnam Era Educational Assistance Program while in service.  All or a portion of the contributions must remain available for the payment of benefits.

We based our decision on a review of your VA records which show that on XX-XX-XX we refunded, as you requested, all contributions which you made to the program.  Since your contributions are no longer available for the payment of benefits, you are not eligible for this education benefit.

The enclosed VA Form 4107, Notice of Procedural and Appellate Rights, contains important information on your right to have a review of this decision.  Please read it carefully.

Adjudication Officer

Enclosure:  VA Form 4107

**Figure 9.02.  Sample Chapter 32 Disallowance Letter (Denial Reason Code 95, Contributions Refunded)**