# M22-4, Part 10, Compliance Suvery. Chapter 05, Procedures Based on Number of Discrepancies Found.

**M22-4, Part 10, Compliance Survey. Chapter 05, Procedures Based on Number of Discrepancies Found.**

[5.01 Expansion of Survey](#501)  
[5.02 Preliminary Determination of a Substantial Pattern of Overpayments](#502)

**5.01 EXPANSION OF SURVEY**

---

**a. General.** When a compliance survey reveals reporting or approval discrepancies which imply that a substantial pattern of overpayments may exist, the survey sample will be systematically expanded until a preliminary determination can be made as to whether such a pattern exists or not. The survey expansion procedures in this paragraph allow flexibility in decisions concerning expansion. However, all decisions must follow the instructions in this chapter, must be based on the evidence of record, and must be clearly documented in the survey report.

**b. Substantial Pattern of Overpayments.** A substantial pattern of overpayments is that which has resulted in overpayments in a significant number of cases. See [Paragraph 5.02(b)](#502b). The compliance survey process can result in only a preliminary determination. The final determination must be made by the Director of the Regional Processing Office having approval jurisdiction for the school or training establishment involved. See Section 6.03 for referrals involving a substantial pattern of overpayments.

**c. Overpayments.** For this determination, this means acts of commission or omission by the school or training establishment which result in payment of benefits to which the beneficiary was not entitled. Except for the initial expansion decision, discrepancies found on the compliance survey which do not result in overpayments will not be considered. Overpayments resulting from the actions of persons or agencies other than the school or training establishment (e.g., VA, the State approving agency, or the beneficiary) also will not be considered. In deciding whether or not to expand the survey sample, the survey specialist must use his or her own judgment in determining whether an overpayment has occurred and what the approximate size of the overpayment is. Confirmation from the Finance or Authorization activities is not needed. However, in making the preliminary determination concerning a substantial pattern of overpayments (see [Section 5.02](#502)), the existence and actual amount of each overpayment must be confirmed.

**d. Elements for Consideration.** In making all decisions on survey expansion, as well as in deciding whether to make a preliminary determination that a substantial pattern of overpayments exists, consider the following elements, not in isolation, but in conjunction with each other:

1. Total Number of Cases Involved. For example, a small number may be considered to favor expansion because little additional work is needed, or to discourage expansion because the final result probably would not uncover any serious problem.

2. Proportion of Discrepant Cases in the Sample Reviewed. For example, a small proportion of discrepant cases in the sample may reflect isolated, rather than systematic errors in reporting procedures.

3. Magnitude of Overpayments. For example, a large number of small overpayments may represent only a small problem in absolute terms, while a small number of large overpayments may represent a greater problem.

4. Compliance History of the School or Training Establishment. For example, a school which has a good compliance history, and an experienced certifying official, should be considered less of a risk than a school with a poor history, or a certifying official with little experience.

**e. 100 Percent Review.** If all records are reviewed as part of the initial sample (see M22-4, Part 10, Compliance Survey. Chapter 02, Preliminary Procedures, Section 2.03), the survey will not be regarded as a 100 percent review. This term is reserved for surveys which require expansion beyond the original sample. Report 100 percent reviews as such in DOOR, and credit time devoted to them (after the initial review) as "Other Measured Hours."

**f. Primary Expansion.** If review of the initial sample reveals overpayment errors in 30 percent or more of the cases, or discrepancies of any type in 50 percent or more of the cases reviewed, the survey specialist must determine whether or not to expand the sample, unless all records have already been reviewed. Expansion should rarely be done if overpayments are found in less than 30 percent of the cases reviewed. If expansion is decided on, the survey specialist must also decide the size of the additional sample. It must be equal to or greater than the initial sample. If the total number of students is low, the first expansion may be a 100 percent review. The sample may be expanded using the procedures in M22-4, Part 10, Compliance Survey. Chapter 02, Preliminary Procedures, Section 2.04, or cases may be identified and randomly selected from school records.

**g. Secondary Expansion.** If review of the expanded sample reveals overpayment errors in 30 percent or more of the cases, the survey specialist must determine whether or not to conduct a 100 percent review, unless all records have already been reviewed. 100 percent reviews should rarely be done if overpayments are found in less than 30 percent of the cases reviewed in the expanded sample. If a 100 percent review is decided on, the survey specialist must also decide the scope of the review. The 100 percent review may be limited to those issues which resulted in the overpayments found during the expanded review. The 100 percent review may be conducted immediately if prepared worksheets are already available, or if the total number of students is low and all cases can be identified and selected from school records. Otherwise, the 100 percent review must be scheduled at a later date, after selecting cases using the procedures in M22-4, Part 10, Compliance Survey. Chapter 02, Preliminary Procedures,Section 2.04 and preparing worksheets.

**5.02 PRELIMINARY DETERMINATION OF A SUBSTANTIAL PATTERN OF OVERPAYMENTS** ([38 USC 3690(b)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3690 edition:prelim)); [38 CFR 21.4202](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=f214dbeb8da7b1c2122b2b5a89c66ae0&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14202))

---

**a. General.** Upon completion of a 100 percent review, the survey specialist will routinely refer problem cases to other VA elements as necessary (see M22-4, Part 10, Compliance Survey. Chapter 06, Referrals,Section 6.02). Each response to a referral will be returned to the Education Services Unit annotated by the authorization or finance activity with the amount of any overpayment created. Base the preliminary determination of a substantial pattern of overpayments on these responses. Apply the elements listed in [Paragraph 5.01(d)](#501d) as indicated in the guidelines below.

**b. Overpayments Found in 30 Percent or More of Cases Reviewed.** When cases with overpayments due to reporting errors and/or approval violations represent 30 percent or more of the cases reviewed in a 100 percent review, a preliminary determination will generally be made that a substantial pattern of overpayments exists.

**c. Overpayments Found in Less Than 30 Percent of Cases Reviewed.** When cases with overpayments due to reporting errors and/or approval violations represent less than 30 percent of the cases reviewed in a 100 percent review, and the school or training establishment maintains a records system and reporting procedure which under normal circumstances would result in proper reports to VA, a determination will generally be made that a substantial pattern of errors does not exist. However, if the records system or reporting procedure is inadequate, a substantial pattern of overpayments may exist.

**d. Exceptions.** If the total number and aggregate amount of overpayments are so small that they do not represent a serious problem, or when this is the first occurrence and the school has not been previously notified in writing, the determination will be that a substantial pattern of overpayments does not exist.

**e. Actions Following the Determination.** If a substantial pattern of overpayments is determined to exist, follow the instructions in M22-4, Part 10, Compliance Survey. Chapter 06, Referrals,Section 6.03. If such a pattern is determined not to exist, document the determination in the survey report. If this is the first occurrence, see M22-4, Part 10, Compliance Survey. Chapter 07, Reports and Correspondence,Paragraph 7.05(c**)** for the required notification to the school or training establishment.