# Part 6: Chapter 7-Miscellaneous

**Part 6: Chapter 7 - Miscellaneous**

[7.01 Payment of Accrued Benefits](#701)

[7.02 Contribution Refunds in Death Cases](#702)

**7.01 PAYMENT OF ACCRUED BENEFITS**

---

The chapter 32 benefit accounting process and the chapter 32 payment system are unique. Chapter 32 accrued benefits must be paid directly from the individual's chapter 32 account. Resolve the issue of accrued benefits before deciding on refund of contributions. For accrued benefits see part IV, [paragraph 11.27i].

**7.02 CONTRIBUTION REFUNDS IN DEATH CASES**

---

**a. Application**

1. There is no specific application form for a death refund claim. However, the request for refund always must be in writing.  Accept a request on VA Form 21-4138, Statement in Support of Claim, on an application for any death benefit, or in a separate letter.

2. A claims folder will be established if none previously existed.

3. There is no time limit for applying for refund of contributions.

**b. Eligibility**

1. Beneficiaries. If a participant dies, pay the amount of unused contributions to the person or persons first listed below (see [38 CFR 21.5067](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=3898953557d3e5a6c0780ca64ea20fac&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_15067)):

 i. The designated beneficiary or beneficiaries of the SGLI (Servicemen's Group Life Insurance) policy.

ii. The surviving spouse of the participant.

iii. The surviving child or children of the participant, in equal shares.

iv. The surviving parent or parents of the participant, in equal shares.

v. If [the beneficiaries listed in subparagraphs (a) through (d) died before the participant died], pay the amount of unused contributions to the participant's estate.

2. Definitions of Dependents. See paragraph 1.02.

*NOTE: Evidence of relationship must be established according to* [*38 CFR 3.205*](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=ec6ac221f9c6c902cffd714d0eeb88a4&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.1.3_1205) *and* [*3.209*](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=ec6ac221f9c6c902cffd714d0eeb88a4&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.1.3_1209) *for those cases in which no SGLI was* *paid.*

**c. Identification of Death Refund Cases**

1. Claims Clerk Review. In any death case, claims clerks should check BDN M26 screen, Ch 32 Participant Account Summary, for unused chapter 32 contributions if the EOD (entered on duty) date is between January 1, 1977 and July 1, 1985.

2. Referral to Adjudicator. An adjudicator or education claims clerk will review any case identified under subparagraph (1) above. He or she will determine who the potential beneficiaries are and continue processing the case.

**d. Determination of SGLI Beneficiaries**

1. Referral to Insurance Center. Adjudication will request a certification of the SGLI beneficiary(ies).

i. All stations will call the OSGLI (Office of Servicemen Group Life Insurance) in New Jersey at [(800) 419-1473]. The caller will give his or her name, the name of the regional office, and the commercial telephone number. He or she will also give the name, Social Security number, and date of death of the veteran. OSGLI will get the necessary information and call the regional office.  Record the information provided by OSGLI on VA Form 119, Report of Contact, showing the name and telephone number of the person contacted at OSGLI. If a claim is pending for the insurance benefit, OSGLI will inform the regional office of the beneficiary information as soon as it is available. The OSGLI will accept Faxed requests. The FAX number is [(973) 643-8723].

ii. The OSGLI will reply by using one of the following statements:

iii. "The deceased was not insured under SGLI at the time of death."

iv. "The deceased was insured by SGLI at the time of death and the beneficiaries (designated specifically or By Law) are as follows: (VARO&IC or OSGLI will show name, address, and share of each beneficiary.)"

v. "The SGLI beneficiary(ies) have not yet been determined. Will advise when determination is made."

2. Determination of Beneficiaries

i. If there was no SGLI in force at the time of death, refund the contributions as follows: the surviving spouse, child (or children), parent (or parents), or the veteran's estate in that order of preference. If the estate is the proper refund beneficiary, see subparagraph f for additional instructions.

ii. If SGLI is payable, refund the contributions to the same beneficiary or beneficiaries. If there was more than one SGLI beneficiary, refund the contributions according to the share of the insurance each beneficiary received.

iii. If SGLI beneficiaries have not yet been determined, take no action until they are determined.

3. Notification to Potential Claimants.

i. If no claim for refund of contributions is of record, send a dictated letter to the potential claimant(s) once they are determined. The letter should advise the claimant(s) of the potential entitlement to a refund of the veteran'seducation contributions. The letter should ask the potential claimant(s) to request a refund on an enclosed VA Form 21-4138. 

ii. Request evidence of relationship [to the participant] in this letter, if necessary.

**e. Processing Applications for Refund**

1. Written Request. Be sure that a written request for refund is of record for each claimant.

2. Proof of Death. If the participant died while on active duty, a DD Form 1300, Report of Casualty, will establish the fact of death. If the participant died after discharge from service, a death certificate is necessary. The OSGLI is the only reliable source for determining the proper insurance beneficiary or beneficiaries. Do not use DD Form 1300 for this purpose.

*NOTE: Line-of-duty or willful misconduct determinations are unnecessary because a refund of contributions is not payment of a* *benefit.*

3. Relationship. Be sure that all necessary evidence of relationship is of record. Such evidence is not necessary if SGLI has been paid.

4. Authorization of Refund. Prepare a memorandum of authorization directed to the station's Chief, Finance activity, over the signature of an authorizer. Include the veteran's file number, the full name and address of each payee, and the proper share (full, 1/2, etc.) for each payee.

5. Disallowance. Send a dictated disallowance letter with appeal rights to the claimant(s).

6. End Product. Use the appropriate chapter 32 end product for all refund applications in a case.

**f. Special Procedure If Estate Is the Proper Claimant**

1. General. Refund the contributions under chapter 32 to the veteran's estate if:

i. SGLI is not payable; and

ii. The veteran has no surviving spouse, child, or parent(s).

2. Payment to Administrator or Executor of Deceased Veteran's Estate

i. A certified copy of the letters of administration or letters testamentary must support the claim.

ii. If there is more than one executor or administrator, one of the co-executors or coadministrators may file a claim. (Prepare any refund to the estate, however, for the coexecutors or coadministrators as appointed by the court.)

iii. If the estate closes before approval of a refund, get a certified copy of the discharge of the fiduciary and court order of distribution. Pay the person or persons shown.

(3) No Administrator or Executor Appointed. If no administrator or executor was appointed for the estate of the veteran, distribution will be made under the intestacy laws of the state of the veteran's legal domicile. In such cases, the matter will be referred to the District Counsel for resolution unless the case is "on all fours" with a previous opinion or instruction issued by the station's District Counsel.

**g. Central Office Review.** [Hines BDC (Benefits Delivery Center)] will periodically identify as many unrefunded chapter 32 accounts as possible from available records and will furnish a listing of these accounts to affected stations. Stations will:

1.  Follow the procedures in subparagraphs c through f above.

2. Make all reasonable efforts to contact the potential refund beneficiaries, including consulting local phone directories.

3. Report to Central Office on the status of each case. The report will be due by the control date given each station with the listing. The report title is "Chapter 32 Death Cases." Submit it through [E-mail addressed to [VAVBAWAS/CO/223B](mailto:VAVBAWAS/CO/223B?subject=Chapter%2032%20Death%20Cases) The RCS (Reports Control Symbol) is 20-0275.

4. Flash the claims folder for possible future refund action if unable to locate the potential beneficiaries. The flash should include the statement, "Unrefunded education contributions under chapter 32, title 38, exist in this case. Make the refund to appropriate beneficiary under chapter 32 if located."