# CHAPTER 5. QUANTITATIVE MEASUREMENT

**CHAPTER 5. QUANTITATIVE MEASUREMENT**  
 June 8, 1999  
 Change 7

 

**SUBCHAPTER I. GENERAL**

[5.01  Scope](#501)

[5.02  Types and Purposes of Quantitative Measurement](#502)

[5.03  Measurement Units and Standards](#503)

[5.04  Areas of Quantitative Measurement and Current Reports](#504)

[5.05  Unmeasured Hours and Other Measured Hours](#505)

[5.06  Borrowed/Loaned Hours and Brokered Work](#506)

 

**SUBCHAPTER II. END PRODUCT CLASSIFICATION**

[5.07  Concept of Classification of Claims and Actions](#507)

[5.08  General End Product Code Principles](#508)

[5.09  End Product Code Groups](#509)

[5.10  Specific End Product Code Determinations](#510)

[5.11  Annotating End Products](#511)

---

 **CHAPTER 5. QUANTITATIVE MEASUREMENT**

**SUBCHAPTER I. GENERAL**

**5.01  SCOPE**

This chapter covers principles applicable to quantitative measurement of education operations only. Circular 20-94-3, “VBA Work Measurement And Gross Productivity Measurement Systems, Executive Summary” gives a brief overview of VBA systems of quantitative measurement. Complete descriptions of VBA Work Measurement and Gross Productivity Systems are found in Circulars 20-97-6, “VBA Work Measurement System And Work Rate Standards,” and 20-97-7, “VBA Gross Productivity Measurement System And Standard And Local Base Weights And Employment Factors.” Consult these publications for information in addition to that which is found in this chapter.

---

**5.02  TYPES AND PURPOSES OF QUANTITATIVE MEASUREMENT**

Quantitative measurement is an essential management tool used for budget preparation, distribution of staffing, and the efficient employment of resources. Productivity measurement measures and compares overall work generated and available resources. Work measurement provides additional detailed information about the processes involved. Productivity measurement focuses only on final outputs; while work measurement focuses also on internal activities and tasks. 

---

**5.03  MEASUREMENT UNITS AND STANDARDS**

**a.** Quantitative standards are numeric expressions of relationships between units of work and units of time expended producing those work units. For purposes of quantitative measurement, base weights and work rate standards have been established for education work units, including most of the end products set forth in Appendix A. These base weights and work rate standards are applicable to the work of a group of employees performing assigned functions in an activity, but not to the work of individual employees or individual teams.

**b.** Complete definitions of all measurement units are found in Circulars 20-97-6 and 20-97-7. Current base weights are displayed in DOOR Report 0007; standard weights are in Column (A) and local weights are in Column (B). Current work rate standards are displayed in DOOR Report 0020 in Column (A).

---

**5.04  AREAS OF QUANTITATIVE MEASUREMENT AND CURRENT REPORTS**

Use the listed DOOR (Distribution of Operational Resources) reports for management in the areas of education activities indicated. Other reports may also contain useful information. See the appropriate Circular as noted in paragraph 5.01 for full definitions of terms and complete descriptions of reports.

**a.** **Gross Productivity Measurement.** Three of the reports listed below show productivity expressed as FTE (Full Time Employee equivalent). They use the standard and local base weight for each education work unit. Monthly and fiscal year-to-date work counts by work unit are included. The standard and local weighted outputs are computed as FTE. The other report shows productivity expressed as standard hours. It uses all work rate standards and work counts for the reporting period. To the total hours for education work units, additional standard hours are added based on hours spent in certain designated activities. Standard hours are credited for these activities on a one-to-one basis for reported actual hours, to generate total hours for education activities.

**1.** Productivity Expressed in FTE

**i.** The productivity of the Education Division, expressed as FTE, is shown on DOOR Report 0007, “Education Total (3070) Standard & Local Base Weights, Work Counts & Weighted Workload (FTE) Data.” Work counts are multiplied by their base weights to generate FTE for that reporting period, and for the fiscal year to date, for each education work unit. The standard and local weighted outputs are computed for each end product or other work unit as well as a division total for all education work units.

**ii.** The productivity indexes of the Education Division, based on productivity expressed as FTE calculated from standard and base weights, are shown on DOOR Report 0068, “Station Total Standard Productivity Indexes (FTE)” and DOOR Report 0069, “Station Total Local Productivity Indexes (FTE),” on the line labeled “Education Total (3070).” This index equals the annualized weighted output in FTE divided by adjusted employees assigned to the division, multiplied by 100. For example, if the standard FTE produced by a station’s Education Division are equal to the adjusted employees assigned to the division, the productivity index is 100. In general, a higher index is a more positive indicator.

**2.** Productivity Expressed in Standard Hours. The productivity of the Education Division, expressed as standard hours, is shown on DOOR Report 0020, “Education Total (3070) Work Rate Standards, Work Counts & Weighted Workload (Hrs) Data.” Work counts are multiplied by their work rate standards to generate standard hours earned for that reporting period, and for the fiscal year to date, for each education work unit. To the total hours for education end products and other work units, additional standard hours are added based on actual hours for formal training, Equal Opportunity complaints, 100 percent audits, State approving agency contract administration, other measured hours and Committee on Educational Allowances to generate total hours for the Education Division.

 

**b. Work Measurement.** The reports listed below provide a listing of biweekly staff hour data from PAID (Personnel and Accounting Integrated Data) and monthly staff hour data from CALM/FMS (Centralized Accounting for Local Management/Financial Management System). They provide a conversion factor to distribute CALM/FMS data to each activity in proportion to PAID distribution. CALM/FMS staff-hour data are used to generate both measured hours and total hours. Direct labor effectiveness ratios are produced in several categories. Direct labor effectiveness ratios equal standard hours divided by direct labor hours, multiplied by 100. For example, if the standard hours produced by a station are equal to the direct labor hours, the direct labor effectiveness ratio is 100. In general, a higher ratio is a more positive indicator.

**1.** Staff hour data and combined direct labor effectiveness ratios for all education activities are shown on DOOR Report 0040, “Field Station Total Staff Utilization (Hrs),” under the heading “Education (3070).”

**2.** Staff hour data and combined direct labor effectiveness ratios for subunits of the Education Division are shown on DOOR Report 0054, “Education Total (3070) Staff Utilization (Hrs).” There are separate headings for “Office of Chief - Edu (3070.2100-05),” “Authorization - Edu (3070.2700-05&2600),” “Files - Edu (3070.2600),” and “Compli & Liaison (3070.2800).”

---

**5.05  UNMEASURED HOURS AND OTHER MEASURED HOURS**

**a.** Unmeasured Hours are those GOE (General Operating Expense) hours spent on activities which detract from a station's ability to perform its primary function of serving veterans. Examples include: fire drills, Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Representative activities, work sampling studies, physical movement of office location, etc.

**b.** Other Measured Hours are those GOE hours not elsewhere reported or calculated from reported work units. They are hours spent on activities which contribute to a station's performance of its primary function of serving veterans. Report these hours for education activities only based on specific instructions from Education Service. Examples include: soliciting schools for remote reviews, destroying Veterans Job Training Act folders.

---

**5.06  BORROWED/LOANED HOURS AND BROKERED WORK**

When one station completes work normally under the jurisdiction of another station, ensure that appropriate credit is taken and borrowed hours and loaned hours are accurately accounted for by all stations involved. Establish controls and conduct periodic follow-up to provide for timely completion of brokered work, to include return of folders to the station of jurisdiction when appropriate.

---

**SUBCHAPTER II. END PRODUCT CLASSIFICATION**

**5.07  CONCEPT OF CLASSIFICATION OF CLAIMS AND ACTIONS**

**a.** The education authorization activity has the responsibility to make an adjudicative disposition of each claim or application for educational monetary benefits, and of each document, inquiry, or other issue related to educational benefits, in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, and procedures.

**b.** The Education Services Unit has responsibility for approval and liaison actions and for compliance surveys.

**c.** Establish a pending issue upon receipt of a claim for a specific benefit, or a document, letter or other material requiring some type of action to discharge the specific VA responsibility relating to the issue raised. The recording of an end product is the formal indication that the responsibility raised with this issue has been discharged.

---

**5.08  GENERAL END PRODUCT CODE PRINCIPLES**

**a. Selection of End Product Code (EPC).** On initial review, identify the issue raised, determine the general grouping (e.g., 200 series, 800 series), and select the specific end product to be recorded for quantitative measurement purposes. Use the criteria in Appendix A to establish both which EPC to use and when final disposition occurs. Familiarity with the criteria in Appendix A is essential to proper recording of work credit.

**b. Claims and Issues Not Covered by Specific Criteria.** The classification criteria for a specific code may not be all-inclusive. Don’t interpret the absence of a certain type of claim or issue form the criteria for a specific EPC to prohibit the use of that EPC, as long as the claim or issue falls within the general criteria for that EPC. Consider first the general grouping (e.g., 200 series, 800 series), then compare the claim or issue to the criteria listed under specific EPCs.

**c. Resolving Questionable Determinations.** In a few instances, proper classification of the issue may not be clearly determinable from the criteria in Appendix A. Usually, these instances can be promptly resolved by first line supervisors. If any doubt or dispute remains, refer the case to higher education supervisors. In those rare instances where the question cannot be resolved at the RPO (Regional Processing Office), refer it to Education Service (223A) for consideration.

---

**5.09  END PRODUCT CODE GROUPS**

**a.** All end products are identified by a 3-digit EPC based on the type of claim or nature of the issue. The first digit identifies the basic grouping of the types. The second digit identifies a subgrouping or specific issue. The third digit may identify a specific issue within a subgrouping, otherwise it will normally be “0.” The third digit may also be used from time to time for special purposes, as directed by RPO management or Education Service. When the third digit is not used to identify the type of claim or issue, it may be incremented to distinguish several issues of the same type pending at the same time, e.g., “210, 211, 212.” EPCs used in education activities are included in the following series:

**b.** **200 Series.** These codes are used to claim work credit for education authorization issues, with the exception of EPC 290. EPC 290 is used for certain eligibility determinations made by the compensation and pension business line. Although it includes rating decisions to determine eligibility for educational benefits and for extension of eligibility period, EPC 290 is not used by education authorization. When a rating is necessary for an education eligibility determination, leave the appropriate education EPC pending while the EPC 290 is established by the compensation and pension office of jurisdiction to control and claim work credit for the rating board action.

**c.** **300 Series.** Only EPC 330, for procedural and regulatory reviews, is used in education processing.

**d.** **400.** This code is used for correspondence actions which are independent of issues covered by any of the other end products.

**e.** **500 Series.** These codes are used for controlled correspondence such as Congressional inquiries and inquiries under the Freedom of Information Act or Privacy Act.

**f.** **800 Series.** These codes are used to claim work credit for liaison, approval, and compliance survey issues.

---

**5.10  SPECIFIC END PRODUCT CODE DETERMINATIONS**

**a. Incomplete Claims.** Record responses to incomplete claims, letters of protest not constituting valid notices of disagreement, and other correspondence under EPC 400.

**b. Future Diary Controls.** Future diary controls will create an independent issue when they “mature,” that is, reach their suspense date. (See par. 6.09.) Before that date, if the future diary is no longer needed, cancel it and do not claim separate work credit. Depending on the reason for cancellation, it may be considered part of another EPC, or recorded as EPC 330.

**c. Multiple Issues.** Also see subparagraph d below for dependency issues.

**1.** Generally, only one EPC is proper even though the claim may involve multiple issues and/or award actions. When several issues are worked at the same time, claim only one EPC although the issues involved could have resulted in separate EPCs had they been received and/or worked at different times. However, when factual circumstances are unrelated, and one adjustment creates an overpayment while another adjustment increases benefits, do not simultaneously process the award adjustments. This ensures that a beneficiary retains the right to dispute a debt, or seek waiver of the recovery of the debt. (For further instructions on determining when factual circumstances are unrelated, see M22-4, pt. IV, par. 13.21.)

*Example 1: An enrollment certification and a notice of reduction are received separately, but worked at the same time. Use only one EPC.*

*Example 2: A notice of an earlier beginning date and a notice of increase are received separately, but worked at the same time. Use only one EPC, even if two award actions are required.*

*Example 3: A college's drop period begins on August 26 and ends on September 15. A veteran drops a 3-credit course on August 28. He adds a 3-credit course on September 5. Both training time changes were made during the period designated for unrestricted enrollment changes. Consider them as resulting from related factual circumstances, unless there is evidence of record showing that the circumstances causing them are unrelated. Process a simultaneous award adjustment. Use only one EPC.*

**2.** Do not record the EPC until all issues raised by the claim have been finally resolved.

*Example:  An enrollment certification and a notice of reduction are received separately, but worked at the same time. Record the EPC when all issues, including mitigating circumstances if applicable, have been finally resolved.*

**3.** When the same claim involves more than one benefit, use a separate EPC for each benefit. Take the appropriate EPC when the determination for each benefit has been made.

*Example:  An application for education benefits may request determination of eligibility for both chapter 30 and chapter 32. Use EPC 200 and EPC 220.*

**4.** When review shows more than one EPC pending for a claimant, carefully examine the circumstances to ensure that separate EPCs exist only for issues which are independent.

**5.** Do not use a separate EPC 400 for correspondence actions completed in the course of processing and disposing of a claim with its own EPC (for example, development letters for evidence required to establish eligibility, or letters replying to a claimant’s request to know the status of a pending claim). However, always use a separate EPC 500 for replies to inquiries from Members of Congress or Government officials, and a separate EPC 510 for replies to requests for information under the Freedom of Information Act/Privacy Act.

**6.** Use only EPC 330 for actions performed as part of permanent transfer-in and transfer-out procedures, unless final action on the pending issue is completed before transfer-out.

**d. Dependency.** Also see M22-4, Part IV, Chapter 9.

**1.** If a dependency determination is made in conjunction with another claim or review, do not take a separate end product. However, if a dependency determination must be deferred, but all other issues can be disposed of, the pending EPC can be taken. A separate EPC can then be established for the dependency issue alone.

*EXAMPLE: A Request for Change of Program or Place of Training and an Enrollment Certification are received for a veteran who has not been enrolled during the past two years. The Request for Change of Program or Place of Training confirms that the veteran is still married, but indicates that his child is now over 18 and attending school. Award benefits for the veteran and spouse and take the appropriate EPC. Use a separate EPC to control development for a Request for Approval of School Attendance for the child.*

**2.** When a dependency change affects benefits other than education (e.g., compensation, vocational rehabilitation), use an EPC for the education action, separate from any work credit for change of the other benefits.

*NOTE:  Determinations of dependency changes affecting multiple benefits should be made simultaneously. This means that all VA elements involved must be notified promptly whenever such changes are made by any one element.*

---

**5.11  ANNOTATING END PRODUCTS**

Annotate the action or award document to show when the EPC was established, changed, continued, cleared, or canceled. When possible, make the annotation in the lower right corner of the document. Enter the EPC, disposition (e.g., established, cleared), disposition date, and legible initials of the person making the disposition. When the EPC, disposition date, and identification of the person making the disposition are generated on an award or disallowance print, do not make a separate annotation.