# PART 01, GENERAL. CHAPTER 06, MONITORING SCHOOL REPORTING PROBLEMS

**PART 01, GENERAL. CHAPTER 06, MONITORING SCHOOL REPORTING PROBLEMS**

[**Subchapter 1.**](#SI) **Identifying School Reporting Problems**  
[6.01  Regional Office Responsibility](#601)  
[6.02  Guidelines for Identifying School Reporting Problems](#602)  
  
**[Subchapter 2.](#SII) Report of Education Overpayments by Facility Code**  
[6.03  General](#603)  
[6.04  COIN EDU 174 - PART 1](#604)  
[6.05  COIN EDU 174 - PART 2](#605)  
[6.06  Use By Education Services Unit in Field Stations](#606)  
[6.07  Disposition Instructions](#607)

**SUBCHAPTER 01. - IDENTIFYING SCHOOL REPORTING PROBLEMS**

**6.01 REGIONAL OFFICE RESPONSIBILITY**

---

All RO (regional office) and RPO (regional processing office) personnel should be alert for school reporting problems. If valid, such problems may provide an early indication of non-compliance with reporting requirements and may indicate a need for a special compliance survey or liaison visit.

---

**6.02 GUIDELINES FOR IDENTIFYING SCHOOL REPORTING PROBLEMS**

RO and RPO personnel who discover school reporting errors should observe the following guidelines. 

**a. Fraud.** If fraud is alleged by a third party or suspected by VA personnel, refer all pertinent facts to Adjudication for appropriate action under existing instructions. This applies to school fraud as well as to payee fraud.   

1. If potential *school* fraud is detected in a chapter 30 case, Adjudication at the RO with local jurisdiction over the school will prepare the fraud determination. If applicable, the RPO will forward all appropriate documentation to the RO of jurisdiction. If the entire chapter 30 folder is needed, it may be *temporarily* transferred to the RO with jurisdiction over the fraud determination.

2. If potential *payee* fraud is detected in a chapter 30 case, the RPO will have jurisdiction over the fraud determination.

**b. Serious Reporting Errors.** Serious reporting errors are those which cause a substantial overpayment of benefits. An example would be if the claimant reported a change in training time but the school did not report this event at all. Regulations require that the school report any such change within 30 days. A report which is a few days late would not be considered a serious reporting error.

1. Any instance of a serious reporting error must be reported to the ELR (Education Liaison Representative). The ELR should make a report to the VSO (Veterans Services Officer). In this report, the ELR will recommend appropriate action (e.g., a liaison call or visit, or a special compliance survey).

2. If a serious reporting error is discovered at one of the four RPOs, the ELR at the RPO should contact his or her counterpart at the RO with jurisdiction over the school or training establishment. The local ELR will make a report to his or her VSO as specified in *subparagraph b(1)* above.

**c. Pattern of Careless Errors.** A pattern of careless errors consists of various types of minor errors which may or may not cause overpayments. For example, a careless error would be the failure to report the standard class sessions for accelerated terms. In such cases, overpayments can be avoided since Adjudication would have the opportunity to determine the standard class sessions before making payment.

1. As with serious reporting errors, careless errors must be reported to the appropriate ELR. After an accumulation of such reporting errors, the ELR will make a report to the VSO. In this report, the ELR will recommend appropriate action (e.g., a liaison call or visit, or a special compliance survey).

2. Since it may be difficult for the ELR at an RPO to isolate a pattern of errors, the RPO should report all minor chapter 30 reporting errors to the ELR of the appropriate RO. The local ELR will be better able to compare chapter 30 reporting errors with similar reporting errors in other education benefit programs and take appropriate action.

**SUBCHAPTER 02. - REPORT OF EDUCATION OVERPAYMENTS BY FACILITY CODE**

**6.03 GENERAL**

---

The COIN EDU 174, Report of Education Overpayments by Facility Code, provides information regarding overpayments at approved educational institutions under chapters 34 and 35. The report provides overpayment data for 6-month and 3-year periods. With the end of the chapter 34 program, Adjudication is no longer required to review the report on a quarterly basis as previous instructions provided.

*NOTE: The report was originally designed for chapter 34 and 35, and is currently restricted to these programs. Eventually, it may be expanded to other education benefit systems. The report is useful only if Adjudicators make the appropriate data entries on each termination and reduction action. For example, Adjudicators must make the appropriate entries in the following fields in BDN: POTENTIAL SCHOOL LIABILITY (312/412 or 406 screens); SCH LIAB (350 screen); or A/R DUE TO NO MITIGATING CIRCUMSTANCES (501 screen). These screens are explained in detail in [6.05 COIN EDU 174 - PART 2](#605).*

**a**. COIN EDU 174 can be used as a tool to reduce further overpayments. (See [Section 6.06](#606)) VA will *not* initiate school liability proceedings (see [Part 1: Chapter 7 - School Liability](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000071640?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)) or other adverse action (see [Part 1: Chapter 8 - Other Actions Due to School Noncompliance](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000071668?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)) solely on the basis of this report.

**b**. The report provides the following information regarding overpayments at each facility:

1. The total amount of all overpayments;

2. The amount of overpayments which involve school liability; and

3. The amount of overpayments which involve failure to establish mitigating circumstances.

**6.04 COIN EDU 174 - PART 1**

---

PART 1 of COIN EDU 174 is issued in three copies. Two copies are for the regional office, and one copy is for the SAA (State Approving Agency). The copies for the regional office are intended for use by Adjudication and VSD. This part provides summary data for each IHL (Institution of Higher Learning) and NCD (Non-College Degree) facility under a field station's jurisdiction. The last page for each station shows the regional office and national totals. A facility will not be listed on this report if there were no overpayments created within the last 3 years which remain uncollected. For each facility, the report provides overpayment data under three different general headings. The three general headings, and their subheadings, are shown below.

**a. A/Rs - Potential School Liability**

1. BALANCE: The current balance of overpayments which may involve some potential school liability. The report shows separate balances for overpayments created during the last 6 months and the last 3 years.

*NOTE: This figure is not an estimate of potential school liability. It is a total of overpayments for those cases in which Adjudication determined that the school could be potentially liable for all or some of the overpayment.*

2. NUMBER: The number of overpayments, shown separately for the last 6 months and the last 3 years, which indicate some potential school liability.

3. AVERAGE: The average overpayment, shown separately for the last 6 months and the last 3 years, computed by dividing BALANCE by NUMBER.

4. PERCENTAGE TO STUDENTS: A percentage obtained by dividing NUMBER by the number of students who were in training at that facility during the *last 6 months*. (This computation is done only for the last 6 months.) The PERCENTAGE TO STUDENTS is a measure of a school's reporting error rate for chapter 35 cases. For example, if the percentage were 10 percent, it means that VA created overpayments involving potential school liability in a number equal to 10% of the eligible persons who trained (even one day) at the facility within the last 6 months. *The overpayments were not necessarily for eligible persons who trained in the last 6 months*.

**b. A/Rs CREATED DUE TO LACK OF MITIGATING CIRCUMSTANCES.** This section provides data concerning overpayments which were caused by the claimant's failure to establish that withdrawal from a course or courses was due to mitigating circumstances. The report provides a breakdown for the last 6 months and the last 3 years. The cases identified in this section may include some of the same cases which also appear in the school liability section since it is possible for both issues to be involved in the same overpayment.

1. BALANCE: The current balance of overpayments, for 6 months and 3 years, which are entirely or partially due to the claimant's failure to establish mitigating circumstances.

2. NUMBER: The number of overpayments, for 6 months and for 3 years, which involve failure to establish mitigating circumstances.

3. AVERAGE: The average overpayment, for 6 months and for 3 years, computed by dividing BALANCE by NUMBER.

**c. TOTAL A/Rs CREATED DURING LAST 6 MOS/3 YRS.** These columns provide summary information on all overpayments created during the last 6 months and during the last 3 years. The figures in these columns are not the sum of the school liability columns and the mitigating circumstances columns since overpayments may be created for reasons which are unrelated to school liability or mitigating circumstances.

1. BALANCE: The current balance of overpayments created within the last 6 months and the last 3 years.

2. NUMBER: The number of overpayments created in the last 6 months and the last 3 years.

3. AVERAGE: The average overpayment, shown separately for the last 6 months and the last 3 years, computed by dividing BALANCE by the NUMBER of trainees.

**d. TOTAL NUMBER STUDENTS.** The number of students who were in training at any time during the last 6 months. This figure is used to determine PERCENTAGE TO STUDENTS as described in [Section 6.04a(4)](#604a4) above.

**6.05 COIN EDU 174 - PART 2**

---

PART 2, which is generated in microfiche format, is issued in two copies. The ELR should forward one copy to the SAA and retain one copy. Adjudication will have access to the copy retained by the ELR. This part contains information on the individual overpaid accounts for each facility for the last 3 years. The items in part II are explained as follows.

**a. FILE NO.**: Self-explanatory

**b. PAYEE NO.**: Self-explanatory

**c. STUB NAME**: Self-explanatory

**d. A/R BALANCE**: The accounts receivable balance at the time the report was generated. This figure is not necessarily the amount of the original overpayment because some part of the original overpayment may have been recovered.

**e. TYPE**: The accounts receivable type code. This report provides data on chapter 34 and 35 overpayments only. The accounts receivable codes for these benefits are 41 and 44 respectively.

**f. POTENTIAL SCH LIAB**: An \* will be displayed if Adjudication set the school liability indicator when they created the overpayment.

**g. LACK OF MIT CIRC**: An \* will be displayed if Adjudication set the mitigating circumstances indicator when they created the overpayment.

**h. A/R NEW THIS RPT**: An \* will be displayed if the overpayment was created within the last 6 months. This will permit ready identification of the recently created A/Rs.

**i. DISCOVERY DATE**: The discovery date of the accounts receivable. This is the month and year (MMYY) that the overpayment was entered in BDN.

**j. CHAPTER**: This will be chapter 35. The other VA education programs do not appear on COIN EDU 174 at this time.

**6.06 USE BY EDUCATION SERVICES UNIT IN FIELD STATIONS**

---

**a**. ELR's should use COIN EDU 174 to help identify potential school reporting problems so that appropriate action can be taken to prevent further avoidable overpayments. Appropriate actions might include:

1. Advising a school that it has an unusually high rate of late reporting of enrollment changes or other errors that have caused overpayments;

2. Encouraging schools to make telephonic or electronic reports of enrollment changes; or

3. Devising ways (such as seminars, etc.) to emphasize to schools and beneficiaries the consequences of failing to complete courses without acceptable mitigating circumstances.

**b**. The compliance survey activity should use COIN EDU 174 to supplement routine audits. Appropriate use of the report might include reviewing the records of a sampling of overpaid cases in addition to the randomly selected cases.

**6.07 DISPOSITION INSTRUCTIONS**

---

Both formats of the COIN 174 Report will be destroyed when 6 years and 3 months old. Records Control Schedule VB-l, part I, item number 07-690.040 is assigned to this report and for any future revisions to the schedule.

---