# Part 5: Chapter 8 - Miscellaneous

**Part 5: Chapter 8 - Miscellaneous**

[8.01  General](#801)  
  
**[Subchapter 1.](#SI) Procedures for RO Education Coordinators**  
[8.02  Overview of RO Education Coordinator's Responsibilities](#802)  
[8.03  RPO Request for Copies of Documents in Claims Folders](#803)  
  
**[Subchapter 2](#SII). Rules for Adding and Removing Dependants**  
[8.04  Effective Date for Adding Dependents](#804)  
[8.05  Effective Date for Removing Dependents](#805)  
[8.06  Due Process and Notification Requirements for Loss of Dependent](#806) [(38 CFR 21.7320)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=37b473943ca930b4ed9cbf8197455a19&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17320)  
  
**[Subchapter 3](#SIII). Miscellaneous RPO Procedures**  
[8.07  Reserved](#807)  
[8.08  Reserved](#808)  
[8.09  [ ] Resolution of Chapter 30 DOD Data Problems](#809)  
[8.10  [Inquiries to DoD]](#810)  
[8.11  [Reserved]](#811)  
[8.12  Priority of Requests](#812)  
[8.13  Control of Pending Issues](#813)  
[8.14  Follow up to Service Departments](#814)  
[8.15  Use of Supporting Documents](#815)  
[8.16  Notification to Claimant](#816)  
[8.17  Reserved](#817)  
[8.18  Board For Correction of Military Records](#818)  
[8.19  Reserved](#819)  
  
**Figure**  
[8.01  Representation of VA Form 22-0569, Report of Contact with DOD](#f801)

**8.01  [GENERAL]**

---

[Subchapter I](#SI) contains procedures for [education coordinators at all ROs (Regional Offices).  [Subchapter II](#SII) contains procedures on dependency award actions.  [Subchapter III](#SIII)] contains procedures for resolving data discrepancies with DOD (Department of Defense).

**SUBCHAPTER I.  PROCEDURES FOR [RO EDUCATION COORDINATORS]**

  
**8.02  OVERVIEW OF [RO EDUCATION COORDINATOR'S RESPONSIBILITIES**

---

Part I, [paragraph 4.04] requires that [an education coordinator and alternate be appointed to handle education] issues at the local ROs.  The education coordinator is the primary contact point for the RPOs (Regional Processing Offices).  The [duties of the education coordinator are as] follows:

**a.  Chapter 30 Background.**  The [education coordinator] should be familiar with the following:

1. General provisions of the chapter 30 program (ch. 1 of this part).

2. Chapter 30 BDN (Benefit Delivery Network) inquiry screens (pt. II, ch. 4).

3. Procedures for regionalized processing (pt. I, ch. 4).

        **b.  [Obtaining Information From Claims Folders.**  See [paragraph 8.03](#803).]

**8.03  [RPO REQUEST FOR COPIES OF DOCUMENTS IN CLAIMS FOLDERS]**

---

**a.**  The education coordinator is responsible for responding to inquires from the RPO regarding chapter 30 claims such as making copies of documents or furnishing information from the veteran's claims folder as needed by an RPO.  Examples include the following: copies of dependency evidence such as marriage certificates or birth records, copies of service records such as a copy of a veteran's discharge certificate (DD Form 214), VA Form 21-686c, Declaration of Status of Dependents, and requests for rating decisions (see par. 3.04b).

**b**.  The education coordinator will call, send e-mail, or FAX the information he or she found in the claimant's claims folder to the RPO.]

**SUBCHAPTER II.  [RULES FOR ADDING AND REMOVING DEPENDENTS]**

  
**8.04  [EFFECTIVE DATES FOR ADDING DEPENDENTS]**

---

**a.  [Overview.**  Only category II veterans with chapter 34 remaining entitlement qualify for increased rates of benefits due to having dependents. )  The regulation for this topic is [38 CFR 21.7131(e)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=37b473943ca930b4ed9cbf8197455a19&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17131).  Effective dates for increases in education awards are different from effective dates for VA compensation and pension awards.  Related topics are:

1. Qualifying Dependents and Evidence Requirements.  See part IV, paragraphs 9.01-9.03.

2. Dependency Processing in BDN.  See paragraph 2.13.]

**b.  [Dependency Exists Before Entry or Reentry Into Training.**  For adding dependents, the term reentry means entry into training following a period of non-training.  Periods of non-training include intervals between terms, semesters, or quarters for which benefits are payable.

1. Include a dependent who exists at the time the veteran enters or reenters training in the veteran's award from the effective date of entry or reentry if:

i. VA receives the claim for the dependent within one year after the date of entry or reentry; and 

ii. VA receives evidence to establish the dependency relationship within one year of its request. 

2. Add a dependent to the veteran's award from the date VA receives notice of the dependent's existence if: 

i. VA receives the claim for the dependent more than one year after entry or reentry; and 

ii. VA receives any necessary evidence to complete the veteran's claim within one year of its request. 

EXAMPLE 1:  A [category II] chapter 30 veteran with chapter 34 entitlement remaining pursues training at a half-time rate from January 1, 1996, through June 9, 1996.  He has no dependents during this period.  The veteran reenters training as a half-time student for the period September 20, 1996, through December 22, 1996.  On October 11, 1996 the veteran submits a claim for additional benefits as the result of his marriage on June 15, 1996.  VA requests a copy of the veteran's marriage certificate on October 15, 1996, and VA receives the requested evidence before October 15, 1997. 

Award Action:  Additional benefits for the veteran's spouse are payable from September 20, 1996, the date of the veteran's reentry into training.  Dependency arises in this case during an interval between terms when no benefits are payable.  The veteran claimed the dependency allowance within one year of reentry into training and furnished evidence to complete his claim within 1 year of VA's request.

EXAMPLE 2:  A veteran enters full-time training for the period September 27, 1995, through May 26, 1996.  His original claim, received on October 10, 1995, does not report any dependents.  A claim for a spouse is received on

November 10, 1995.  The date of marriage is April 15, 1994.  On November 15, 1995, VA informs the veteran of the need to submit a marriage certificate.  VA receives the requested documentary evidence on December 14, 1995. 

Award Action:  Pay additional benefits for the spouse from September 27, 1995, because VA received the claim within one year from the date of entry into training, despite the date of claim being more than one year from the date dependency existed.

EXAMPLE 3:  The veteran in EXAMPLE 2 reenters full-time training for the period September 19, 1996, through

May 24, 1997.  On December 15, 1996 he claims additional benefits for his child born on June 28, 1992 who is in the custody of his former wife.  The veteran's claim includes a copy of the child's birth certificate.

Award Action:  Pay additional benefits for the child from September 19, 1996, because VA received the claim within one year from that reentry date.  Additional benefits cannot be paid for the period beginning September 27, 1995, because VA did not receive the claim within one year from September 27, 1995.  If the school is organized on a semester or quarter basis, determine the beginning dates of terms after September 27, 1995.  If, for example, a new term started on January 3, 1996, benefits for the child can be paid from that date because VA received the claim within a year of that reentry.

**c.  Dependency Arises After Initial Entry or Reentry Into Training.**  Include a person who becomes a veteran's dependent after the veteran initially enters or reenters training (i.e., during a period of training) in the veteran's award from the date dependency arises if: 

1. VA receives notice of the dependent's existence within one year of that date; and

2. VA receives any evidence necessary to complete the veteran's claim within one year after VA requests the evidence. 

EXAMPLE:  A veteran was enrolled in three-quarter time training for the period January 4, 1997, through June 17, 1997.  She had no dependents at the beginning of her enrollment.  On May 30, 1997, she got married; however, she did not notify VA of the change in her dependency status at that time and continued to receive benefits as a veteran with no dependents through the end of her enrollment period.  On August 23, 1997, this veteran reentered training at a full-time rate and submitted a claim for the dependency allowance.  She included a copy of her marriage certificate with the claim. 

Award Action:  Pay increased benefits from May 30, 1997, because VA received the claim within a year from the date of the dependent's existence.

**d.  Definition of Date Dependency Arises.**  The date dependency arises means: 

1.  For a spouse, the date of the veteran's marriage; 

2. For a natural child, the date of the child's birth; 

3. For a stepchild, the date the child becomes a member of the veteran's household; 

4. For an adopted child, the effective date of the adoptive placement agreement or the date of the interlocutory decree of adoption, whichever is earlier; or 

5. For a parent, the date VA receives notice of the parent's dependency. 

**e.  Evidence Furnished More Than One Year After Request**  

1. If VA receives the requested evidence after one year from the date VA requested the evidence and the claimant cannot show good cause for the delay of the submission, add the dependent from the date VA receives the evidence [(38 CFR 21.7131(e)(1)(iii)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=37b473943ca930b4ed9cbf8197455a19&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17131) and [21.7131(e)(3)(i)(C))](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=37b473943ca930b4ed9cbf8197455a19&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17131).  If the veteran is not in training on the date VA receives the evidence, add the dependent on the date of reentry following receipt of the evidence.

2. If VA receives requested evidence after one year from the date VA requests it and the claimant can show good cause for the delay of the submission of the evidence, add the dependent from the date VA became aware of the dependent's existence  [(38 CFR 21.7131(e)(1)(iii) and 21.7131(e)(2)(i)(B)).](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=37b473943ca930b4ed9cbf8197455a19&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17131)  Examples of good cause include:

i. Failure by VA to notify the claimant that the evidence must be received within one year of the date of request.  (See [pt. IV,] subpar. 9.03e).)

ii. Documented evidence of the claimant's delay in receiving necessary documents, such as divorce decrees, marriage certificates, or birth certificates from some other source.

iii. Documented evidence that the claimant did not receive the VA request for evidence.

EXAMPLE 1:  The claimant received benefits for the period January 3, 1996, through May 23, 1996.  On May 5, 1996, VA received a claim for additional benefits for a child born on February 24, 1996.  On May 15, 1996, VA sent the claimant a letter requesting the child's birth certificate.  The letter advised the claimant that the evidence must be received within one year from the date of the letter for benefits to be paid from the child's date of birth.  On September 20, 1997, the birth certificate was received by VA along with an enrollment certification for the period September 4, 1997, through May 22, 1998.

Award Action:  Award additional benefits for the child born on February 24, 1996 effective September 20, 1997, the date of receipt of the evidence.  Since VA received the evidence more than one year after it was requested and because there is no evidence of good cause for the delay, add the child from the date of receipt of the evidence.

EXAMPLE 2:  The facts are the same as above, but the VA letter requesting the birth certificate did not advise the claimant that the evidence must be received within one year from the date of request.

Award Action:  Pay additional benefits for the child from May 5, 1996, the date VA learned of the existence of the dependent.  The failure to notify the claimant of the necessary time-frame for submission of evidence is good cause for the late submission.  Note that, although VA received the claim within one year of the child's date of birth, benefits cannot be paid from the date of birth because the evidence was not received within one year of request.

**f.  Adding Dependents During Training Period.**  Whether or not a dependent can be added to an award depends on the claimant's veteran status and training time.

1. If a chapter 30 category II veteran is training at less than half time, add any newly established dependents to the award by updating the 304 Chapter 30 Dependency screen.  This will change the dependency code to reflect those established dependents.]  Do not pay additional benefits until there is an increase in training time.

2. Do not add dependents to a service person's award until the claimant becomes a veteran.

**8.05  [EFFECTIVE DATE FOR REMOVING DEPENDENTS]**

---

When a veteran loses a dependent, determine the effective date for discontinuance of the dependency allowance according to [38 CFR 21.7135 (b), (c) or (d).](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=37b473943ca930b4ed9cbf8197455a19&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17135)  The date of removal of a dependent will depend on the reason for the loss of dependency relationship.  The following paragraphs discuss the various provisions.

**a.  End of the Month Removals.** If the dependency relationship terminates for any of the following reasons, adjust the award effective the first of the month following the event.

1. For any dependent, the death of the dependent. 

2. For a spouse, a final decree of divorce or annulment. 

3. For a child of any age, the child's marriage.

4. For a school child between the ages of 18 and 23, termination of school attendance. 

5. For a parent, a change in the parent's marital status, income or net worth that is determined to end the parent's dependency on the veteran for support.  (See M21-1, pt. IV, ch. 13, subch. II.)

**b.  Exceptions to the End of Month Rule.**  There are three situations in which a dependency relationship is terminated for the reasons listed above but the dependent is removed before the end of the month.  If more than one of these situations exists in a particular case, use the earlier date for removal. 

1.  If VA receives notice of the loss of a dependent before benefit payments have been authorized for a certified period of enrollment, remove the lost dependent from the veteran's award effective the day following the date of loss; or

2.  If the loss of a dependent occurs during the final calendar month of a certified period of enrollment, discontinue the additional allowance for that dependent at the end of the enrollment period; or

3.  If the loss of a dependent occurs during a month in which the veteran later becomes entitled to an increased rate of educational assistance benefits (e.g., increase in training time, legislative rate increase), remove the lost dependent from the veteran's award on the date the greater monetary benefit is payable. 

EXAMPLE:  The veteran's certified enrollment for half-time training is for the period January 4, 1996, through June 9, 1996.  Benefit payments have been authorized at $335.81 monthly based on one-half time training, which includes an additional allowance for the veteran's spouse and minor child.  On March 10, 1996, the veteran notifies VA of his child's marriage on March 5, 1996.  VA also receives notice from the veteran's school of an increase in his training time to three-quarter time on March 21, 1996.

Award Adjustment:  Compare the rates of payment.  A veteran training at one-half time with two dependents receives less benefits than a veteran training at three-quarter time with one dependent.  Remove the child from the veteran's award effective March 21, 1996, since the increased rate due to the training time change results in an increase in benefits, even without the dependent. 

**c.  [Additional Exceptions to the End of Month Rule].**  If a dependent is lost for a reason other than those discussed in [subparagraph a](#805a) above, apply the following removal dates.

1. Remove a child from the veteran's award on the date of the child's 18th birthday unless payments can be continued because of the child's school attendance or incapacity for self-support [(38 CFR 21.7135(d)(2)).](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=37b473943ca930b4ed9cbf8197455a19&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17135) 

2. Remove from the veteran's award a school child whose attendance will continue beyond age 23 on the date of the child's 23d birthday [(38 CFR 21.7135(d)(3)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=37b473943ca930b4ed9cbf8197455a19&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17135)). 

3. Remove a stepchild from the veteran's award on the date the child is no longer considered a member of the veteran's household.  Information and instructions for determining when a parent-child relationship has ended are contained in M21-1, part IV, paragraph 12.17 ([38 CFR 3.503(f)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=37b473943ca930b4ed9cbf8197455a19&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.1.3_1503)). 

4. Remove a helpless child from the veteran's award on the last day of the month following 60 days after VA notifies the veteran that the child's helplessness has ceased (if the child attains the capacity for self-support).  [(38 CFR 21.7135(d)(4))](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=37b473943ca930b4ed9cbf8197455a19&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17135)

5. Remove all dependents from a veteran's chapter 30 award on the date that remaining chapter 34 entitlement is exhausted.  The chapter 30 [BDN system does] this automatically.

**8.06  [DUE PROCESS AND NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR LOSS OF DEPENDENT**

---

([38 CFR 21.7320)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=37b473943ca930b4ed9cbf8197455a19&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17320)]

Some dependency reductions require pre-notification to the claimant before award action to remove the dependent can be taken.  The requirements for these cases are discussed below.  M21-1, part IV, chapter 9 provides detailed procedures for scheduling and controlling hearings and processing appeals on these cases.

**a.  Information From the Claimant - Contemporaneous Notice.**  When the claimant, fiduciary, or authorized representative provides written, factual, unambiguous information about the loss of a dependent and is aware of the effect of the loss of the dependent on benefit payments, remove the dependent and notify the claimant of the reduction.  The chapter 30 [BDN] system will generate a proper letter for removal of dependents.

**b.  Information From a Third Party - Pre-Reduction Notice.**  If VA receives information about the loss of a dependent from someone other than the claimant, fiduciary, or authorized representative, defer action on the reduction and send the veteran a letter that contains the following information:

1. An explanation of the proposed reduction that clearly states the reasons for and effects of the reduction;

2.Notice that he or she can request a predetermination hearing on the issue and that the hearing must be requested within 30 days of the date of the VA letter;

3. Notice that he or she has 60 days to submit evidence to show that the proposed reduction should not be made; and

4. Notice that if no response is received within 60 days, benefits will be adjusted.  This notice must include the effective date of the proposed reduction and adjusted rate of benefits.

**c.  Response Received Within 60 Days**

1.Change Confirmed By Claimant.  If the claimant or representative acknowledges and confirms the dependency loss before the 60 day control period has expired, take action immediately to remove the dependent from the appropriate effective date.

2. Evidence Received From Claimant.  If the claimant or representative submits evidence that contradicts the pending reduction, review the evidence immediately.  Take one of the following actions:

i. Dependent Established.  If the evidence is sufficient to determine that the dependent should not be removed, cancel all controls and notify the claimant that the evidence was sufficient to continue additional benefits for the dependent.

ii. Insufficient Evidence.  If the evidence does not support continued benefits for the dependent, notify the claimant of the reason(s).  Advise the claimant of any additional evidence that would support continuation of the benefits.  Review the control suspense date and, if necessary, change it to provide the claimant 30 days to submit additional evidence.  Do not reduce benefits until the control period has expired.

3. Hearing Requested.  If the claimant requests a hearing, take one of the following actions:

i.  Request Within 30 Days.  If VA receives the hearing request within 30 days of the pre-reduction notice, continue payment of additional benefits for the dependent until the hearing officer makes a final decision.

ii.  Request After 30 Days.  If VA receives the hearing request after 30 days, but within 60 days, adjust the award to remove dependents at the expiration of the control period or when the hearing officer reaches a decision, whichever is earlier.

4. Request to Avoid Overpayment.  If, during the control period, the claimant requests that benefits be reduced to avoid an overpayment pending the final decision, remove the dependent effective date last paid.  Continue the control as described above.

5. Review of Evidence Delayed.  If, within 60 days, the claimant submits new evidence or requests additional time to obtain evidence, but the regional office does not review the information until after the benefit reduction, take one of the following actions:

i.  If the evidence is sufficient to make a final determination, either restore benefits or notify the claimant of the reasons that the evidence did not support additional allowance for dependents. 

ii.  If the evidence requires additional development, restore the benefits effective the date of removal and establish a control for at least 30 days.  Develop for the additional evidence and advise the claimant of the time limitation.

6. Request For More Time.  If the claimant requests additional time to obtain any necessary evidence and shows good cause why the evidence could not be obtained within the original period, adjust the control period and notify the claimant of the new date by which the evidence must be received.

**d.  Final Action.**  If the claimant has not requested a hearing or submitted evidence by the end of the 60 day control period, remove the dependent based on the evidence of record.  The effective date of removal will be the applicable date provided in [paragraph 8.05](#805).  Notify the claimant of the reduction, the reasons for the reduction, and the procedures for appealing the reduction.

**e.  Response Received After 60 Days.**  If the claimant responds to the pre-reduction notice more than 60 days from the notice, process the response as a re-opened claim for increase in benefits.

**f.  Controls.**  Control dependency issues under the appropriate supplemental end product.  See M21-1, part IV, chapter 9 for controls on hearing requests.

**8.07  [RESERVED]**

---

**8.08  [RESERVED]**

---

**SUBCHAPTER III.  MISCELLANEOUS RPO PROCEDURES**

**8.09  [ ] RESOLUTION OF CHAPTER 30 DOD DATA PROBLEMS**

---

**a.  Elements Involved.**  The data furnished by DMDC (Defense Manpower Data Center) and displayed on the 30D screen is used to determine eligibility to chapter 30 as described in chapter 3.  There are instances in which the [DoD] data is incomplete or inaccurate.  Standardized procedures govern communications between VA, the service department contact points, and DMDC.

**b.  Interagency Agreement.**  VA and DoD have developed an Interagency Agreement which addresses data exchanges.  This agreement identifies each agency's responsibilities in the exchange and use of the data required to administer chapter 30.  The agreement also outlines guidelines to be followed in the resolution of problem cases when update or correction of data is necessary.

**c.  [RPO Contact with DoD.** Each RPO should appoint one DoD Coordinator and one back-up Coordinator. The DoD Coordinator is the primary Point of Contact (POC) for the service departments, both for inquiries from VA and to respond to requests from the various service departments.

1. The DoD Coordinator should screen inquiries from the VCEs, ECMs or Senior VCEs to ensure the requested information is necessary and not available within the claimant’s record, including (but not limited to) the claimant’s file, BIRLS record, or DoD record.

2. The DoD Coordinator should provide the service department POC with all necessary information available to the RPO regarding the inquiry so that the POC can provide a complete response to the inquiry.

3. RPOs should give top priority to service department inquiries and to those with Congressional interest. The DoD Coordinator should handle all inquiries received from the service departments regarding education benefits on a “next case basis.”

4. It is important to ensure that the service department points of contact have the names and email addresses of each DoD Coordinator in the RPOs. This information should be furnished to all 14 service organizations points of contacts, as well as any changes. Always refer to the current RPO Letter providing a list of the 14 service organizations with the contacts’ email and phone information.

**d. TIMS Documentation.** The response received via email should become a part of the claimant's electronic file. If necessary, a NOTE within TIMS should be created, providing the information received, and from whom within DoD.]

| **Department of Veterans Affairs** | | | **REPORT OF CONTACT WITH DOD** | | | | | | | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1.  VA REGIONAL OFFICE | | | | 2.  VETERANS NAME (First, middle, last) | | | | | | | |
| 3.  VETERANS BRANCH OF SERVICE | | | | 4.  VA C AND SS NO (If different) | | | | | | | |
| PART I - VA INFORMATION | | | | | | | | | | | |
| LINE NO. | FINDINGS | | | | | | | | | YES | NO |
| 5 | IS A COPY OF DD 214 OF RECORD? | | | | | | | | |  |  |
| 6 | IS THE COPY CERTIFIED? | | | | | | | | |  |  |
| 7 | IS DD214 SOURCE?  IF NOT, SPECIFY SOURCE IN ITEM #8. | | | | | | | | |  |  |
| 8 | SOURCE | | | | | | | | |  |  |  |  |
| 9 | CONGRESSIONAL/HARDSHIP? | | | | | | | | |  |  |
| 10 | IS CLAIMANT "2 X 4" ELIGIBLE? | | | | | | | | |  |  |
| 11 | HAS AWARD ACTION BEEN TAKEN? | | | | | | | | |  |  |
| 12. DATE OF AWARD | | 13. MONTHLY RATE(S) | | | | | 14.  AWARD DATE(S) | | | | |
| PART II - DISCREPANCY REQUIRING RESOLUTION  (Check requested information and explain, if necessary) | | | | | | | | | | | |
| LINE NO. | ITEMS TO BE VERIFIED | | CK | | DD214/  BIRLS | DMDC | | | EXPLANATION | | |
| 15. | ELIGIBILITY (ENROLLMENT) STATUS | |  | |  |  | | |  | | |
| 16. | ENTERED ON ACTIVE DUTY | |  | |  |  | | |  | | |
| 17. | RELEASED FROM ACTIVE DUTY | |  | |  |  | | |  | | |
| 18. | CHARACTER OF DISCHARGE | |  | |  |  | | |  | | |
| 19. | SEPARATION REASON | |  | |  |  | | |  | | |
| 20. | PAY REDUCTION AMT. | |  | |  |  | | |  | | |
| 21. | TERM OF ENLISTMENT/  SERVICE | |  | |  |  | | |  | | |
| 22. | KICKER ENTITLEMENT | |  | |  |  | | |  | | |
| 23. | TERM OF SERVICE AND KICKER INCONSISTENT? | |  | |  |  | | |  | | |
| 24.  REMARKS | | | | | | | | | | | |
| 25.  NAME OF PREPARER | | | | | | | | 26.  DATE | | | |
| PART III - RESPONSE | | | | | | | | | | | |
| 27.  ACTION TAKEN AND DATE | | | | | | | | 28. METHOD OF DELIVERY (FAXED OR MAILED) | | | |
| 29.  SERVICE REPRESENTATIVE | | | | | | | | 30. TELEPHONE NUMBER | | | |
| 31.  SIGNATURE | | | | | | | | 32.  DATE | | | |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

**Figure 8.01.  [Representation of VA Form 22-0569, Report of Contact with DOD]**

**8.10  [INQUIRIES TO DoD] (See Policy Advisory dated September 13, 2006)**

---

In order to eliminate unnecessary inquiries to the service departments, [the DoD coordinator should use discretion] when determining whether or not an inquiry is necessary.  Unnecessary inquiries only serve to delay the exchange of data in more critical cases.  [Some examples of valid reasons to contact DoD:]

**a.**  **Status Code 00**.  The status code on the 30D screen is "00" (Unknown). [Request that DoD determine if the claimant declined MGIB in writing. If no response is received from the DoD point of contact within 30 days, pay benefits if the claimant is otherwise eligible.] (Also, see par. 3.06a(1).). [If the status code 00 shows pay reductions, process the case without development.]

**b.**  **Pay Reduction or Other Evidence of Participation**.  [ ] The status code is Ineligible and (1) the claimant submits evidence to VA of participation in the chapter 30 program or (2) the Pay Reduction Amount indicates service pay was reduced for chapter 30.

**c.**  **Incorrect Kicker Information**.  Evidence indicates that "kicker" information is missing or incorrect.  (Do not delay award processing when developing for kicker information.)

**d.**  **Missing Separation Reason**.  The separation reason is missing on the 30D screen and cannot be inferred from copy 4 of the DD Form 214.

**e.**  **Missing [or conflicting] Enlistment Term**.  The enlistment term is blank or appears to be incorrect, based on other evidence, or the kicker code and enlistment term conflict.  (If possible, do not delay award action.)

*NOTE:  Data such as EOD (Entered on Duty Date), RAD (Released from Active Duty Date), and character of service can generally be obtained from the DD Form 214, VADS, or BIRLS.* [ ]

**8.11  [RESERVED]**

---

  

**8.12  PRIORITY OF REQUESTS**

---

**a.  [High Priority.]**  In high priority cases (see [par. 8.09c(3)](#809c3)), the respondent (VA or service department) should attempt to respond within 1 working day. If unable to give a complete answer within one working day, acknowledge receipt of the request and include the estimated time required to provide a complete reply.

**b.  [Second Priority.]**  The second priority consists of cases where the only reason an award cannot be made is due to incorrect or missing [DoD] information. [Email] inquiries in this category to the appropriate [service department POC]. The respondent should comply with the request within one working day if possible.

**c.  [Last Priority.]** The last priority consists of cases where benefits have been awarded at a reduced rate pending update or correction of data. [Email] inquiries in this category to the appropriate service department. The respondent should attempt to comply with the request within 10 working days.

**8.13  CONTROL OF PENDING ISSUES**

---

 Control all inquiries to the service departments with the appropriate pending issue. [ ] Do not take the end product until the final award action or disallowance action is taken. This may occur before the 30D record is updated to reflect eligibility in cases where [the VCE] uses the override capability.  
 

**8.14  FOLLOW UP TO SERVICE DEPARTMENTS**

---

If a response from the service department [is not received timely, the DoD Coordinator should follow up with a phone call to the service department contact point. A second inquiry should not be sent] as this creates unnecessary work for the service departments.

**8.15  USE OF SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS**

---

The Army and Marines have requested that VA furnish all available supporting documentation when requesting an update or correction of the 30D screen.  Attaching the supporting documentation when developing to the Army or Marines helps to speed responses.  Do not include documentation when making requests to the other service departments.

 

**8.16  NOTIFICATION TO CLAIMANT**

---

When award action is delayed because a request has been sent to the service department to update or correct 30D screen eligibility information, notify the claimant of the cause of the delay in his or her claim.  Use the text in chapter 7 of this part for the letter.  Use the optional paragraph when the inquiry is to the Army or the Marines.

**8.17  RESERVED**

---

**8.18  BOARD FOR CORRECTION OF MILITARY RECORDS**

---

        When a claimant maintains that the data furnished by DMDC is incorrect, the RPO should use VA Form 22‑0569 to request verification of the data in question.  If the service department confirms that the data on the 30D screen is correct, inform the claimant and furnish DD Form 149, Request for Correction of Military Records, for the purpose of requesting a correction of his or her records.

**8.19  RESERVED**

---