# Part 01, General, Chapter 3

**Part I: Chapter 3 - Overview and History of Education Programs**

***Last updated March 2023***

**[Subchapter 1](#SI) - Overview of Education Benefits**  
[**3.01 Introduction**](#301)  
[**3.02 Summaries of Current VA Education Programs**](#302)  
[**3.03 Summaries of Former VA Education Programs**](#303)  
  
**[Subchapter 2](#SII) - Summary of Public Laws**  
[**3.04 Educational Assistance Laws - World War II**](#304)  
[**3.05 Educational Assistance Laws - Korean Conflict**](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000064007/PART%2001,%20GENERAL.%20CHAPTER%2003,%20OVERVIEW%20AND%20HISTORY%20OF%20EDUCATION%20PROGRAMS#305)  
[**3.06 Educational Assistance Laws - Vietnam Era**](#305)  
[**3.07 Educational Assistance Laws - Post-Vietnam Era**](#306)  
[**3.08 Educational Assistance Laws - Persian Gulf War Era**](#307)

[**3.09 Educational Assistance Laws – Post 9/11 Era**](#309)  
 

**[Historical Education Benefit Rates](#HistoricalEducationBenefitRates)**  
**[Appendix A1. Chapter 30 FY 2024 Forward](#Ch30RatesFY2024Forward)**

**[Appendix A2. Chapter 30](#Chapter30Rates)**

**[Appendix B. Chapter 33](#Chapter33Rates)**

**[Appendix C. Chapter 35](#Chapter35Rates)**

**[Appendix D. Chapter 1606](#Chapter1606Rates)**  
  
 

**SUBCHAPTER I. OVERVIEW OF EDUCATION BENEFITS**

 

**3.01 INTRODUCTION**

**a. Education Programs.** The Education Service of the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) currently administers eight education benefit programs.

**b. Administration of Education Programs.**The following is a brief overview of how education programs are administered.

(1) Beneficiary Responsibilities. Individuals must file applications for education benefits before VA may determine eligibility or pay benefits. After establishing eligibility, VA may require individuals to inform VA of their continued pursuit or other information.

(2) Eligibility Determinations and Claims Processing. The eligibility criteria vary widely from program to program. Eligibility usually depends upon the period served on active duty. VA determines eligibility for the title 38 U.S. Code programs. VA relies on the Department of Defense (DoD) or the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) to determine eligibility for the title 10 U.S. Code programs. Two Regional Processing Offices (RPOs) (Buffalo and Muskogee) process education claims.

(3) Course Approval. Except for the section 901 program, an individual can only receive benefits for courses (programs) that are approved by the State approving agency (SAA), or in some cases the Director, Education Service. Education Liaison Representatives (ELRs) review approval actions submitted by SAAs to ensure they are in compliance with the law. VA reimburses the SAAs for their services.

(4) Educational Institutions and Job Training Establishments. Educational institutions and job training establishments are required to make periodic reports to VA regarding the enrollment of VA beneficiaries and changes in their enrollment.

(5) Benefit Payments. Education benefits are usually paid on a monthly basis rather than as a lump sum at the beginning of a term. The monthly rate depends on the number of credit hours or clock hours the student is taking. If a student fails to complete a course, he or she may be required to repay the benefits received for that course in some cases.

The Post-9/11 GI Bill (Chapter 33) program changed how education benefits are paid.  This program pays the school or training establishment the tuition and fees of each term and issues a monthly house allowance to the claimant along with a separate payment for books and supplies. There are other one-time payments authorized under this program which will be described in greater detail in [**M22-4, Part XII**](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/topic/554400000007294/Part-12-Chapter-33).

**3.02 SUMMARIES OF CURRENT VA EDUCATION PROGRAMS**  
*NOTE: This paragraph provides links to summaries of the education programs.*

**a. Programs assigned to Education Service**

(1) [**Summary of Chapter 30, title 38, U.S. Code, All Volunteer Force Educational Assistance Program**](https://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill/montgomery_bill.asp) *(also referred to as the Montgomery G.I. Bill-Active Duty Educational Assistance Program (MGIB)).*

(2) [**Summary of Chapter 32, title 38, U.S. Code, Post-Vietnam Era Veterans' Educational Assistance Program (VEAP).**](https://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill/veap.asp)

(3) [**Summary of Chapter 35, title 38, U.S. Code, Survivors' and Dependents Educational Assistance**](https://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill/survivor_dependent_assistance.asp) (also referred to as Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA)).

(4) [**Summary of Chapter 1606, title 10, U.S. Code, Educational Assistance for Members of the Selected Reserve**](https://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill/mgib_sr.asp) (*also referred to as the Montgomery G. I. Bill - Selected Reserve (MGIB-SR)).*

(5) [**Summary of Chapter 1607, title 10 U.S. Code, Educational Assistance for Reserve Component Members Supporting Contingency Operations and Certain Other Operations**](https://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill/reap.asp) (also referred to as the Reserve Educational Assistance Program (REAP)).

(6) [**Summary of Section 901, Public Law 96-342, Educational Assistance Test Program.**](https://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill/national_testing.asp)

(7) [**Summary of National Call to Service (NCS), section 510, title 10, U.S. Code**](https://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill/national_call_to_service.asp).

(8) [**Summary of Chapter 33, title 38, U. S. Code, Post 9/11 GI Bill Program; Forever GI Bill – Harry W. Colmery Veterans Educational Assistance Act**](https://www.benefits.va.gov/gibill/post911_gibill.asp)

**b. Programs Assigned to Other Services**

(1) Restored Entitlement Program for Survivors (REPS), Section 156, Public Law 97-377. See [**M21-1 MR Part IX, Subpart I, chapter 6 for full instructions.**](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001034/topic/554400000003242/Chapter-06-Restored-Entitlement-Program-For-Survivors-REPS)This program is often referred to as REPS or the Quayle Amendment. The program restores social security benefits that were reduced or terminated by Public Law 97-35, the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981.

(2) Additional Compensation and Pension (C&P) Benefits Based on School Attendance.. See [**M21-1, part IV, chapter 14**](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001034/topic/554400000003120/Part-04-Part-IV-Compensation-DIC-and-Death-Compensation-Benefits)for full instructions about this benefit. Additional C&P benefits are available based on the school attendance of children who are over age 18 and under age 23.

(3) [**Chapter 31, title 38, U.S. Code,**](http://www.vba.va.gov/bln/vre/vrs.htm)Training and Rehabilitation for Veterans with Service-Connected Disabilities. (See [**Chapter 31, title 38, U.S. Code,**](http://www.access.gpo.gov/uscode/title38/partiii_chapter31_.html)for the underlying legislation.)

(4) Chapter 18, title 38, U.S. Code, Benefits for Children of Vietnam Veterans. See [**M21-1MR, Part VI**](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001034/topic/554400000003205/Part-06-Part-VI-Chapter-18-Benefits) for full instructions about this benefit. This program provides vocational training to a Veteran’s children who are diagnosed with certain birth defects including spina bifida.

**3.03 DESCRIPTION OF FORMER VA EDUCATION BENEFITS**

**a. World War II GI Bill (Public Law 78-346).**To be eligible, an individual must have served on active duty between September 16, 1940, and October 6, 1946. An individual was entitled to one year of full-time training plus periods equal to the time on active duty, up to a maximum of 48 months. The delimiting date was nine years after the end of the war, July 25, 1947, or nine years after release from World War II active duty, whichever was earlier. Individuals must have entered training before July 25, 1951, and completed training by July 25, 1956, the final cutoff date. An individual received monthly subsistence allowances with additional allowances for dependents. Training was limited to full time; there was no provision for part-time training. There were limits on the combined VA subsistence allowance and earnings of single individuals. VA paid educational institutions a maximum of $500 a year for tuition, books, fees, and other training costs. If an individual elected to have VA pay more than $500, the entitlement charge was one day for each additional $2.10 paid.

 

**b. Korean Conflict GI Bill (Public Law 82-550).** To be eligible, an individual must have served on active duty between June 27, 1950, and January 31, 1955. An individual was entitled to one and one-half times his or her period of active service, up to a maximum of 36 months. The delimiting date was eight years after discharge or release from active duty. An individual had to enter training within three years of his or her discharge or release from active duty. The final cutoff date was January 31, 1965. An individual received educational assistance with additional allowances for dependents. There were limits on the combined VA subsistence allowance and earnings only for single Veterans pursuing job training.

**c. Vietnam Era GI Bill (38 U.S.C. Chapter 34, enacted by Public Law 89-358).** To be eligible, an individual must have entered active duty before January 1, 1977, or must have contracted for enlistment under a delayed entry program before January 1, 1977, been assigned to a reserve component at that time and entered active duty before January 2, 1978. Only individuals with active duty after January 31, 1955, had potential eligibility for chapter 34. An individual must have served on active duty for a minimum of 181 days unless discharged or released because of a service-connected disability or disabilities. Discharges or releases from active duty must have been under conditions other than dishonorable. The program ended on December 31, 1989. See [**M22-4, Part V, Chapter 9**](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000077044/Part%205:%20Chapter%209%20-%20Chapter%2034%20Issues) for a more detailed discussion of chapter 34.

**d. Hostage Relief Act of 1980 (Public Law 96-449).** This program provided education benefits to American citizens held hostage before January 1, 1981. This program provided some educational benefits to spouses and children of hostages. Former hostages, their spouses, and children could receive up to the maximum amount payable under chapter 35 while attending educational institutions or job training establishments approved for Veterans' training. Former hostages could receive education benefits following their release from captivity. They were entitled to a maximum of 45 months of benefits with a January 21, 1991, delimiting date. Spouses and children could receive education benefits beginning after November 3, 1979. The ending date for spouses or children was the date of the captive's release. If the spouse or child was in training on that date, benefits could be extended to the end of a term, quarter, or semester, or for 12 weeks following the ending date. Except for certain extensions, the program ended on January 20, 1991. The program was codified in[**5 U.S.C. 5569.**](http://www4.law.cornell.edu/uscode/html/uscode05/usc_sec_05_00005569----000-.html)

**e. Veterans' Job Training Act (Public Law 98-77).** This program provided for payments to employers for training certain Korean Conflict and Vietnam Era Veterans who had been unemployed for long periods of time. To be eligible, a Veteran must have been unemployed for 10 of 15 weeks immediately before applying. A Veteran could receive a maximum of 9 months of assistance. A Veteran rated 30 percent or more for service-connected disabilities, or 10 or 20 percent with serious employment handicaps could receive a maximum of 15 months of assistance. The program was intended to help defray the costs of hiring and training Veterans for stable and permanent positions involving significant training. VA administered the program, while Department of Labor (DOL) was responsible for promoting the development of employment and job training opportunities. The departments had joint responsibilities for public information and assisting Veterans and employers in applying for the program. Veterans had to file before September 30, 1989, and enter training before March 31, 1990. See [**Circular 22-90-5, Appendix B**](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000058691/Circular-22-90-5-AMENDATORY-LEGISLATION?query=22-90-5)for full instructions for this program.

**f. Section 207, Public Law 101-366.** This law permitted certain 1977 and 1978 service academy (U.S. Air Force Academy, U.S. Coast Guard Academy, U.S. Military Academy, and U.S. Naval Academy) and 1978 Senior Reserve Officer Training Corps (SROTC) graduates to receive an amount equal to what would have been received under 38 U.S.C. chapter 34 for training pursued before January 1, 1990. A limited number of 1977 SROTC graduates were also eligible. To be eligible, an individual must have graduated from one of the service academies or completed SROTC programs, received a commission, served more than 180 consecutive days as a result of the commission, and been discharged or released under conditions other than dishonorable or continued on active duty. Individuals had until January 1, 1992, to file applications. See [**Circular 22-90-5, Appendix B**](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000058691/Circular-22-90-5-AMENDATORY-LEGISLATION?query=22-90-5)for full instructions.

**g. SMOCTA (Public Law 102-484).**The Service Members Occupational Conversion and Training Act of 1992 (SMOCTA ) program assisted individuals leaving active duty to obtain employment through participation in significant training leading to employment in stable and permanent positions. To be eligible, a Veteran had to be discharged from active duty on or after August 2, 1990, and: (1) had a primary or secondary military occupational specialty that DoD determined was not readily transferable to the civilian work force; (2) was entitled to receive compensation for a service-connected disability or disabilities rated by VA at 30% or more; or (3) was unemployed at the time of his or her application and had been unemployed for at least 8 of the 15 weeks preceding his or her application. An individual must have applied for a SMOCTA program by September 30, 1996, and begun a SMOCTA program by March 31, 1997. However, because funding was never approved beyond September 30, 1995, no Veteran could enter a SMOCTA program after that date. A Veteran had to enter a training program through his or her employer. The employer received reimbursement of 50 percent of the Veteran's starting wage rate. Employers had until January 31, 2000, to apply for final reimbursement for this training.

**h**. **Veterans Retraining Assistance Program (VRAP).**  On November 21, 2011, the President signed into law the “VOW to Hire Heroes Act” of 2011.  That law established a retraining assistance program **(VRAP)**for individuals who were at least 35 but no more than 60 years of age, had an other than dishonorable discharge, were unemployed,  had no eligibility for any VA education benefit and were not in receipt of VA compensation due to unemployability.  This act was in conjunction with the Department of Labor (DOL) who would ensure the claimant met the eligibility requirements of DOL.  VRAP benefits began on July 1, 2012.  Eligible claimants were entitled to 12 months of full time benefits.  There was no authority for less than full time training. The last day to receive benefits was April 1, 2014.

**i.** **Non-Contributory Veterans Education Assistance Program (PL 96-342).** Provides an educational assistance pilot program to encourage enlistments and reenlistments in the armed forces after September 30, 1980 and before October 1, 1981. Authorizes the Secretary to pay the monthly contribution of such enlistees who elect to participate in the Post-Vietnam Veterans Educational Assistance Program.

**j. The Antiterrorism Act of 1986[,](http://www.access.gpo.gov/uscode/title10/subtitlea_partiii_chapter110_.html)Educational Assistance for Members Held as Captives and their Dependents**. A summary is not available. See [**M22-4, Part III, chapter 12**](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073280/Part%203:%20Chapter%2012%20-%20The%20Antiterrorism%20Act) for information on this program.

 [**Go To Top**](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000064007/PART%2001,%20GENERAL.%20CHAPTER%2003,%20OVERVIEW%20AND%20HISTORY%20OF%20EDUCATION%20PROGRAMS#Top)

**SUBCHAPTER II. SUMMARY OF PUBLIC LAWS**

This subchapter summarizes the public laws affecting education benefit programs.

**[3.04 Educational Assistance Laws - World War II](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000226429?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)**

 

**[3.05 Educational Assistance Laws - Korean Conflict](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000226430?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)**

**[3.06 Educational Assistance Laws - Vietnam Era](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000226433?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)**

 

**[3.07 Educational Assistance Laws - Post Vietnam Era](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000226434?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)**

**[3.08 Educational Assistance Laws - Pursian Gulf War](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000226437?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)**

 **[3.09 Educational Assistance Laws - Post 9/11 Era](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000226538?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)**

 

[**Go To Top**](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000064007/PART%2001,%20GENERAL.%20CHAPTER%2003,%20OVERVIEW%20AND%20HISTORY%20OF%20EDUCATION%20PROGRAMS#Top) 

**HISTORICAL EDUCATION BENEFIT RATES**

**[Appendix A1 - Chapter 30 Rates FY 2024 and Forward](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000241369?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)**

**[Appendix A2 - Chapter 30 Rates FY 2007 - FY 2023](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000224976?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)**

**[Appendix B - Chapter 33 Rates](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000225005?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)**

**[Appendix C - Chapter 35 Rates](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000225098?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)**

**[Appendix D - Chapter 1606 Rates](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000225124?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)**