# Part 7: Chapter 3 - Eligibility Issues

**Part 7: Chapter 3 - Eligibility**

**[3.01 General](#301)**  
  
**[Subchapter 1. Applications for Benefits](#SI)**  
[3.02 Overview of Eligibility Determinations](#302)  
[3.03 Establishing Qualifying Service-Connected Disability or Death](#303)  
[3.04 Eligible Person With Veteran of Reserve Status](#305)  
  
**[Subchapter 2. Documenting Entitlement Determinations](#SII)**  
[3.05 Computer-Generated Documentation](#306)  
[3.06 Identifying Data](#307)  
[3.07 General Data](#308)  
[3.08 Child and Spouse Data](#308)  
[3.09 Computer-Generated Fields](#)

**3.01 GENERAL**

---

This chapter provides procedural instructions Education must use when reviewing original applications for chapter 35.

**a. References.** Read this chapter in connection with:

**(1)** Chapter 1, which provides eligibility requirements and describes other unique features of chapter 35.

**(2)** Chapter 2, which describes how Benefits Delivery Network (BDN) works for this benefit.

**(3)** Part III, chapter 1, which covers jurisdiction, folder establishment, and claims establishment procedures for all benefits. However, see paragraph Part 7, 8.03 for chapter 35 claims establishment procedures.

 **(4)** Part III, chapter 3, which provides procedures for processing education applications which apply to all benefits.

**(5)** Part II, chapter 3, which describes the BDN inquiry screens available for chapter 35.

**b. Eligibility Extracts.** When a Regional Processing Office (RPO) receives an original chapter 35 claim, Upstream will create The Image Management System (TIMS) file using the Claims Establishment (CEST) command and establish an End Product Code (EPC) 240

.

**SUBCHAPTER I.  APPLICATIONS FOR BENEFITS**

**3.02 OVERVIEW OF ELIGIBILITY DETERMINATIONS**

---

The discussion which follows assumes that jurisdiction is properly assigned and that a claim has been properly established in BDN. These issues are discussed in part 7, chapter 8 and part III, chapter 1.

**a. Application.** Review [**VA Form 22-5490**](https://www.vba.va.gov/pubs/forms/vba-22-5490-are.pdf), Application for Survivors' and Dependents' Educational Assistance (DEA), for completeness according to part III, chapter 3. In accordance with [**38 CFR 21.3021(b)**](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_13021), address correspondence and benefit payments for children with eligibility to chapter 35 directly to the child unless there is a valid reason as to why the child should not act for himself or herself (i.e. child is under age 18 at the time of processing or the child has a legal guardian).

**NOTE 1:** A claim for Disability or Death Compensation, Pension, or Dependency and Indemnity Compensation (DIC) does not constitute a claim for chapter 35 benefits.

**b. Establishment of Eligible Dependents**. See chapter 1.02(e) and (f) for the definition of spouse, surviving spouse, and child. When applicable, information includes cross-references to the appropriate compensation and pension regulations.

**c. Establishment of Qualifying Service-Connected Death or Disability.** See chapter 1.02d.

**d. Effect of Claimant's Military Service.** See chapter 1.03.

**3.03 ESTABLISHING QUALIFYING SERVICE-CONNECTED DISABILITY OR DEATH**

---

**a. General**.  If additional information is needed from the Veterans Service Center (VSC), the VSC location appearing on the rating in Veterans Benefits Management System (VBMS) should be contacted, by e-mail.  The Veteran’s name, file number, and date of birth should be provided, along with the information needed. 

**NOTE 2:**When the Veteran has not filed a claim for disability or when the Veteran's rating is less than 100% and shows no individual unemployability, the beneficiary has not established that he or she is an "eligible person" under [**38 CFR 21.3021(**](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_13021)**a)** and therefore has not established "status" as a proper claimant for chapter 35 benefits. The Court of Veterans Appeals has ruled that a beneficiary must establish with a preponderance of the evidence (more than 50%) that he or she is a proper beneficiary before being entitled to the benefits and protections of Title 38. Since "status" is not established, VA does not have a duty to further develop the claim.

**3.04 ELIGIBLE PERSON WITH VETERAN OR RESERVE STATUS**

---

When an eligible person serves on active duty in the Armed Forces or in the Selected Reserve and applies for chapter 35 training, the Veterans Claims Examiner (VCE) must consider the following issues:

**a. Character of Discharge.** See paragraph 1.03.

**b. Extension of Ending Date.** See paragraph 1.04b and 1.05b.

**c. Eligibility Under Chapters 30, 31, 32, 33, 34 of Title 38, U.S. Code or Chapters 1606 of Title 10, U.S. Code.** If an individual has eligibility to another education benefit based on his or her own active duty or Selected Reserve service, FLASH any existing education folder to cross reference any file number assigned based on the chapter 35 beneficiary’s own service as a Veteran or Reservist. During routine chapter 35 award processing, review BDN records under both claim numbers to ensure that the beneficiary is not receiving duplicate benefits.

**SUBCHAPTER II.  DOCUMENTING ELIGIBILITY DETERMINATIONS**

**3.05 COMPUTER-GENERATED DOCUMENTATION**

---

The VCE must determine basic eligibility (see eligibility requirements in chapter 1 and complete the 311 screen as instructed below.

**a. 311 Screen**. The 311 screen (see [**fig. 3.03**](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073695/Part%207:%20Chapter%203%20-%20Eligibility%20Issues#f303)) will be used to document eligibility and entitlement determinations. Capture a copy of the BDN 311 screen in the beneficiary’s TIMS folder See chapter 2 for a general description of this screen. When necessary, the 311 screen can be used to generate eligibility information even when no award will be processed at that time (for example, when processing a Certificate of Eligibility (COE)). In such cases, the VCE should clear the pending issue because BDN does not create a master record. Upon the creation of a new pending issue file (PIF), the VCE must reenter all pertinent eligibility data on the 311 screen.

**NOTE 3**: The BDN 311 screen does not contain fields to show the dates or character of the beneficiary’s service. Do not use the BDN 311 screen to compute eligibility if the beneficiary is ineligible due to the character of his or her discharge.  The claim will be processed as a denial.  See par. 4.02.

**3.06 IDENTIFYING DATA**

---

The 311 screen shows the date, file number, end product, and stub name (initials of first and middle name, and first five letters of last name) from the PIF.

**3.08 CHILD AND SPOUSE DATA** (See [(G) 2023 25 July: Procedural Advisory: Elimination of Delimiting Date for Certain Chapter 35 Beneficiaries](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000239618?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) for guidance as amended in 38 U.S.C. § 3512 by section 234 of PL 117-328)

---

The VCE must enter or make changes to basic eligibility data in certain fields on the 311 screen. BDN will calculate eligibility, entitlement, and the delimiting date based on this data. (See [**par. 3.11**](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073695/Part%207:%20Chapter%203%20-%20Eligibility%20Issues#311) and chapter  2.).  Even though BDN provides basic calculations, the VCE must take care to limit any payments based on date of marriage, date stepchild became a member of the Veteran’s household, date of adoption, service in the Armed Forces, duplication of benefits, and retroactive payment rules.

**a. DATE OF DEATH and PERMANENT AND TOTAL DISABILITY DATE**

**(1)** Spouse (Veteran had a service-connected death.  No permanent and total disability effective date prior to death).

See chapter 1.05a(1) for the eligibility period.  Choose the most advantageous beginning date for the spouse that will cover any enrollments in TIMS and provide the latest delimiting date.  Input this date in the DATE OF DEATH field.  Leave the PERMANENT AND TOTAL DISABILITY DATE field blank.

**NOTE 4**:  If Veteran died on active duty, input date of death in DATE OF DEATH field and leave the PERMANENT AND TOTAL DISABILITY DATE field blank.  Later, the VCE will input “Y” in DIED ACTIVE DUTY field.

**(2)** Spouse (Veteran had/has a permanent and total disability.  If the Veteran has since passed away, the permanent and total disability effective date was prior to death).

See chapter 1.05a(2) for the eligibility period.  Choose the most advantageous beginning date for the spouse that will cover any enrollments in TIMS and provide the latest delimiting date. 

If the Veteran is still alive, input the most advantageous date in the PERMANENT AND TOTAL DISABILITY DATE field and leave the DATE OF DEATH field blank.  BDN will establish a delimiting date of 10 years from date chosen.

If the Veteran has passed due to a non-service-connected death, input the most advantageous date in the PERMANENT AND TOTAL DISABILITY DATE field and the date of death in the DATE OF DEATH field.  BDN will establish a delimiting date of 10 years from the date of death.  However, the spouse may still begin their eligibility from the most advantageous date in the PERMANENT AND TOTAL DISABILITY DATE field.

If the Veteran has passed due to a service-connected death, input the DEA effective date in the PERMANENT AND TOTAL DISABILITY DATE field and the most advantageous date in the DATE OF DEATH field.  BDN will establish a delimiting date of 10 years from the most advantageous date in the DATE OF DEATH field.  However, the spouse may still begin their eligibility from the DEA effective date.

**NOTE 5**:  If allowing 20 years due to the DEA effective date being within 3 years of Veteran’s discharge, input the DEA effective date in the DATE OF DEATH field + “Y” in DIED ACTIVE DUTY field.  Leave the PERMANENT AND TOTAL DISABILITY DATE field blank.  BDN will establish a delimiting date of 20 years from the DEA effective date.

**NOTE 6**:  If allowing 10 years from date of marriage due to the date of marriage being after the date of notification, input the date of marriage in the PERMANENT AND TOTAL DISABILITY DATE field.  Leave the DATE OF DEATH field blank.  BDN will establish a delimiting date of 10 years from date of marriage.

**(3)** Spouse (Veteran is Missing in Action (MIA) or Prisoner of War POW) or forcibly detained by a foreign government):

Leave these fields blank.

**(4)** Child (Veteran had a service-connected death.  No permanent and total disability effective date prior to death).

See chapter 1.04a(1) for the eligibility period.  Input the beginning date for the child. Input this date in the DATE OF DEATH field.  Leave the PERMANENT AND TOTAL DISABILITY DATE field blank.  BDN will establish a delimiting date of 8 years from the date in the DATE OF DEATH field. 

**NOTE 7**:  If BDN does not give the correct delimiting date, the VCE will adjust the date of birth until the correct delimiting date is generated.

**(5)** Child (Veteran had/has a permanent and total disability.  If the Veteran has since passed away, the permanent and total disability effective date was prior to death).

See chapter 1.04a(2) for the eligibility period.  If the child has no election, input the DEA effective date in the PERMANENT AND TOTAL DISABILITY DATE field.  If the child has an election, input the date of rating in the PERMANENT AND TOTAL DISABILITY DATE field.  If the Veteran is still alive, leave the DATE OF DEATH field blank.  If the Veteran has since passed, input the date of death in the DATE OF DEATH field.

**NOTE 8**:  If BDN does not give the correct delimiting date, the VCE will adjust the date of birth until the correct delimiting date is generated.

**(6)** Child (Veteran is Missing in Action or Prisoner of War or forcibly detained by a foreign government):

       Leave these fields blank.

**b. MIA/POW/FORCIBLY DETAINED DATE.** Enter the date as defined in paragraph 1.04a(3) and 1.05a(3) when eligibility is based on these factors.

**c. DIED ACTIVE DUTY.** Input “Y” if Veteran died on active duty or DEA date is within 3 years of Veteran’s release from active duty date. 

**NOTE 9**:  If other events are more advantageous than this 20-year generated delimiting date, leave this field blank.

**d. PRIOR VA TRAINING.** Beneficiaries may not receive more than 81 total months of benefits under two or more VA programs. If there is any indication that the beneficiary previously received VA education benefits, determine the amount of prior training used by reviewing BDN and the Long-Term Solution (LTS). In order to charge entitlement for prior VA training when entitlement used is given in months and fractions of a month, the fractional month must be converted to days. Use table 4 in part IV, chapter 14.

**EXAMPLE 1**: The beneficiary used 13.75 months of chapter 32 entitlement and is now applying for chapter 35 benefits. Convert .75 months to 22 days. Enter the prior training as 13 months and 22 days.

In addition, BDN awards initial entitlement of 45 months; however, unless the beneficiary’s first enrollment began before August 1, 2018, the beneficiary has initial entitlement of 36 months.

**(1)** CHAP 35 MOS DAYS. If the beneficiary has prior chapter 35 training or is to be charged excessive entitlement for Special Restorative Training (SRT), enter the number of months and days in CHAP 35 MOS and DAYS. (See par. 4.05.)

**NOTE** **10**:  If enrollment begins on or after August 1, 2018, input 9 months and 00 days in this field so BDN will reduce initial entitlement to 36 months.  If no enrollment is in TIMS, but due to the eligibility period or retroactive payment rules, payments prior to August 1, 2018, would not be made, input 9 months and 00 days in this field so BDN will reduce entitlement to 36 months.

**NOTE 11**:  If enrollment begins prior to August 1, 2018, make no adjustment to this field.  If no enrollment is in TIMS, but due to the eligibility period or retroactive payment rules, payments prior to August 1, 2018, are possible, make no adjustment to this field and edit any Certificate of Eligibility to state “You have 45 months and 0 days of full-time benefits if you begin using your entitlement (attending a training program) prior to August 1, 2018; you will have 36 months of full-time benefits if you begin using your entitlement (attending a training program) on or after August 1, 2018.” 

**(2)** OTHER. Enter the months and days of beneficiary’s previous training under VA education programs other than chapter 35.

**NOTE 12**:  Do not include any Chapter 31 usage by beneficiary. 

**(3)** EXAMPLES.  Examples that illustrate the fields above are as follows.

***EXAMPLE 2****:* Beneficiary is approved for training beginning January 2020.  Because beneficiary’s training began on or after August 1, 2018, the VCE will input 9 months and 00 days of training under CHAP 35 MOS DAYS so BDN will award 36 months of entitlement.

***EXAMPLE 3****:* Beneficiary is approved for training beginning January 2017.  Beneficiary used 40 months of combined benefits under chapters 30 and 1606.  Because training began before August 1, 2018, the VCE may award up to 45 months.  Due to the 81-month rule however, the beneficiary will receive a maximum of 41 months under chapter 35.  Knowing that data input in the CHAP 35 MOS DAYS field will consider the 45-month limitation and data input in the OTHER MOS DAYS field will consider the 48-month limitation, the VCE has two options.  The VCE may input 4 months and 00 days of training under CHAP 35 MOS DAYS so BDN will award 41 months of entitlement. OR the VCE may input 7 months and 00 days of training under OTHER MOS DAYS so BDN will award 41 months of entitlement.   

***EXAMPLE 4****:* Beneficiary is approved for training beginning January 2020.  Beneficiary used 40 months of combined benefits under chapters 30 and 1606.  Due to the 81-month rule, the beneficiary could receive up to 41 months under chapter 35.  However, because training began on or after August 1, 2018, the VCE may only award 36 months.  The VCE will input 9 months and 00 days of training under CHAP 35 MOS DAYS so BDN will award 36 months of entitlement. 

**(4)** MODIFY PRIOR USED ENTITLEMENT.  If later, the VCE needs to modify prior used entitlement, the VCE should use the **CORR** command and **M23** as **Screen Name**.  Tab to the **PRIOR VA TRNG TIME** field and input **00-00**.  Tab to the **PRIOR VA TRNG TYPE** field and delete the entry.  Press enter.  Award processing must be deferred until the next BDN cycle and the master record reflects the correct original entitlement.  BDN cycles twice per week, on Monday and Thursday.  After the master record updates, resume normal processing.    

**e.** **VETERANS SERVICE PERIOD**. Enter the abbreviation for period of service of the Veteran upon whose service the entitlement to chapter 35 is based. See part II, chapter 9.30, for the appropriate service codes.  Service periods are as follows: 

**WWII**:  December 7, 1941 to December 31, 1946

**KC**:  June 27, 1950 to January 31, 1955

**PTE**:  February 1, 1955 to August 4, 1964

**VE**:  August 5, 1964 to May 7, 1975

**PTE**:  May 8, 1975 to August 1, 1990

**PGW**:  August 2, 1990 to present

**f. BIRTH DATE OF BENEFICIARY (Payee 41-49).** This field is only for claims from children. Enter the birth date of the child based on information contained on the application or on other documents in the Veteran's claims folder.

**NOTE 13:** BDN edits do not allow RPOs to pay a child beneficiary beyond age 31. If it is necessary to pay a child beyond age 31, change the child's date of birth as appropriate to allow BDN to generate a proper delimiting date and pay that child beneficiary until that date.

**g. EDUCATION LEVEL.** Enter this information from the application. Enter a number (1 through 17) corresponding to the number of years of schooling completed by the beneficiary beyond the kindergarten level.

**h. SEX.** Enter **M** for male or **F** for female.

**i. FIRST RELEASE FROM ACTIVE DUTY.**  See Part 3 chapter 4.02d.  If the child was not discharged from active duty until after his or her 26th birthday, enter the day before the child's 26th birthday as the release from active duty date. If a release from active duty date equal to or later than the child's 26th birthday is entered, BDN will not generate the proper delimiting date, i.e., the child's 31st birth date. If the child never served on active duty in the Armed Forces, leave blank.

**j. TIME LOST BEYOND CONTROL**. See Part 3 chapter 4.08.  If the child had to suspend training for reasons beyond his or her control, enter the beginning and ending dates of the suspended period in the BEGIN DATE and END DATE fields. If this is not a factor, leave the fields blank.

**k. PERIOD OF DISABILITY.** See Part 3 chapter 4.03.  Complete this field if the spouse or surviving spouse has a disability which prevented him or her from training during a period when he or she would otherwise have been eligible. Enter the proper amount of time in MOS and DAYS. This field, without completion of the DATE ELECTED BY CLAIMANT field, adds the period of disability to the normal delimiting date.

**l. DATE ELECTED BY CLAIMANT**. Complete this field if the situation is the same as in subparagraph k above, and the spouse or surviving spouse elects to resume training on a date other than his or her delimiting date. Enter the actual date elected by the claimant. This field, with completion of the PERIOD OF DISABILITY field, adds the period of disability to the revised delimiting date as calculated by this actual date.

**3.09 COMPUTER-GENERATED FIELDS** (See [(G) 2023 25 July: Procedural Advisory: Elimination of Delimiting Date for Certain Chapter 35 Beneficiaries](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000239618?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) for guidance as amended in 38 U.S.C. § 3512 by section 234 of PL 117-328)

---

BDN generates these fields based on the data entered according to [**paragraph 3.08**](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073695/Part%207:%20Chapter%203%20-%20Eligibility%20Issues#308) above. The VCE and authorizer must review the generated fields for correctness.

**a. DELIMITING DATE.** See paragraphs 1.04 and 1.05.

**b. ORIGINAL ENTITLEMENT.** See paragraph 1.07.

**c. NO ELIGIBILITY**. If the data does not show that the beneficiary is eligible, the VCE should move to the 411 Education Disallowance screen. See chapter 4 for instructions on completing this screen.