# Part 8: Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues

**Part 8: Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues**

**[Subchapter 1](#SI). BDN Issues**  
[4.01 Certificate of Eligibility](#401)  
[4.02  Disallowance](#402)  
[4.03  [Reserved for Future Use]](#403)  
[4.04  [Reserved for Future Use]](#404)  
[4.05  [Reserved for Future Use]](#405)  
[4.06  [Reserved for Future Use]](#406)  
[4.07  [Reserved for Future Use]](#407)  
[4.08  [Reserved for Future Use]](#408)  
[4.09  [Reserved for Future Use]](#409)  
[4.10  [Reserved for Future Use]](#410)  
[4.11  [Reserved for Future Use]](#411)  
[4.12  [Reserved for Future Use]](#412)  
  
**[Subchapter 2.](#SII) Out-of-System Issues**  
[4.13  Manual Award Processing - General](#413)  
[4.14  [Reserved for Future Use]](#414)  
[4.15  Awards for Coast Guard Reserve Members Requiring Action by the St. Louis Regional Processing Office](#415)  
  
**[Subchapter 3.](#SIII) Other Authorization Issues**  
[4.16  Prior Benefits Paid Under Another Law](#416)  
[4.17  [Reserved for Future Use]](#417)  
[4.18  [Reserved for Future Use]](#418)  
[4.19  [Reserved for Future Use]](#419)  
[4.20  Unpublished Instructions](#420)  
[4.21  Manual Entitlement Computations](#421)  
[4.22  Mobilization Adjustments](#422)  
[4.23  Involuntary Separation Procedures](#423)  
  
**[Subchapter 4.](#SIV) Periodic Rate Increases**  
[4.24 [Reserved for Future Use]](#424)  
[4.25  Chapter 1606 System Changes](#425)  
[4.26  Automated Adjustments](#426)  
[4.27  Review and Adjustment of Awards](#427)  
[4.28  Coast Guard and Buffalo Cases](#428)  
[4.29  One-Time Notice](#429)  
[4.30  End Product Credit](#430)  
  
**Figures**  
[4.01 Representation of VA Form 22-0291 - Chapter 1606 Increased Educational Assistance Allowance](#f401)  
 

**SUBCHAPTER I.  BDN ISSUES**

         
**4.01  CERTIFICATE OF ELIGIBILITY**

---

Use the Benefits Delivery Network (BDN) to issue a Certificate of Eligibility, if an application and other documentation establishing eligibility are received without an enrollment certification.  (See Training Guide (TG) 22-99-5, The Chapter 1606 User Guide, part III, chapter 4.)

**4.02 DISALLOWANCE**

---

Disallow claims using BDN.  (See TG 22-99-5, part III, chapter 3.)

**4.03  [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]**

---

**4.04  [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]**

---

**4.05  [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]**

---

**4.06  [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]**

---

**4.07  [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]**

---

**4.08  [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]**

---

**4.09  [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]**

---

**4.10  [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]**

---

**4.11  [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]**

---

**4.12  [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]**

---

**SUBCHAPTER II.  OUT-OF-SYSTEM ISSUES**

**4.13  MANUAL AWARD PROCESSING—GENERAL** See System Advisory dated March 5, 2008

---

**a.  General.**  This subchapter describes how to prepare awards for claims that cannot be processed on BDN.  These include claims for correspondence training, apprenticeship, other on-the-job training, flight training and all types of training for members of the Coast Guard Reserve (see [par. 4.15](#415)).  For these cases, each Regional Processing Office (RPO) will determine eligibility.  Each RPO will process Certificates of Eligibility and awards.  RPOs will prepare and forward hard-copy award documents to the Buffalo RPO.  The Buffalo RPO will compute amounts payable, issue payments and certifications, create accounts receivable, issue appropriate award letters, compute entitlement charges, and assist other RPOs on payment inquiries. 

**b.  Regional Processing Office Procedures for Manual Cases**.  The Education Divisions in each RPO will follow the remaining procedures in this paragraph for claims involving correspondence training, flight training, entrepreneurship training, and apprenticeship or other On-The-Job Training (OJT) for components other than the Coast Guard Reserve.  See [paragraph 4.15](#415) for Coast Guard Reserve claims.

(1)  Review Eligibility.  When a claim for apprenticeship/OJT, flight, entrepreneurship training or correspondence training is received, review the claim for basic eligibility and eligibility to the specific program.  If eligibility does not exist, process a disallowance.

(2)  Establish a Type "I" Master Record.  Establish a type "I" Certificate of Eligibility Issued master record in BDN for all manually processed cases.  In the next screen field on the 310 (Eligibility and Entitlement) screen, enter "APP" for apprenticeship, "OJT" for other job training, "COR" for correspondence training, or "FLT" for flight training.  This master record will permit the proper issuance of Notice of Exception (NOE) messages on the case and identify the record as one that is being paid outside the BDN.  RPOs will not process payment until this master record is established. 

(3)  Award Preparation.  After an "I" master record has been established, prepare a hard-copy Certificate of Eligibility and award as described in subparagraphs c and d below.

*NOTE:  If a BDN award is attempted on a Coast Guard "I" master record, the message "COAST GUARD CASE" will display on the M21 screen (near the middle of the screen).  "COAST GUARD CASE” will also be displayed in the message line.  No Coast Guard Reserve case can be paid through BDN.*

(4)  Change to Training Type Payable on BDN.  To process an award for a type of training that is payable on BDN, take the following actions:

(i)  Send an e-mail message to the Buffalo RPO indicating that a BDN award is pending.  Ask for entitlement used in the manually processed award, and the date last paid.  Specify the claimant's name, claim number, and type of program for the award that was manually processed.

(ii)  After the response is received from Buffalo, process the pending award.  Use the CORR command to enter the entitlement used in the CUM REDUCED field.  The award will remove the master record from "I" master record status.  
  
*NOTE:  Both the RPO and Buffalo Finance Division must exercise care to avoid duplicate payment for any overlapping award periods.  If the pending BDN award begins before the scheduled termination date of the manually processed award, the RPO should not enter the award until Buffalo has indicated that no further manual payments will be issued.*

(5)  NOE Processing.  NOE messages will be received by the RPO of jurisdiction over the BDN master record.  On "I" type master records, benefits will not be suspended as the result of NOE messages being received.  If benefits being paid from the Buffalo RPO need to be suspended or terminated, take action as soon as possible, because Buffalo will be unaware of any status changes until it is advised by the station of jurisdiction.

(6)  Letters.  RPOs will prepare and release disallowance letters.  The Buffalo RPO will prepare and release *award letters* patterned after the award letters shown in TG 22-99-5.

**c.  VA Form 22-1992**. See RPO letter 22-07-24. Prepare VA Form 22-1992, Authorization for Certificate of Eligibility or Disallowance, in duplicate for an original award or a supplemental award involving a change in Certificate of Eligibility data, in accordance with current procedures in part IV, paragraph 12.10, with the following exceptions:

(1)  Delimiting Date (item 8):  Enter the date of basic eligibility plus 14 years or the date computed for an extension, described in [paragraph 4.22](#422), or other delimiting date extension as appropriate. 

(2)  Type of Certificate (item 10):  Enter 1 or 3.  Temporary does not apply.

**d.  VA Form 22-1997**.  Prepare VA Form 22-1997, Education Award, in duplicate in accordance with current procedures in part IV, paragraph 12.11, with the following exceptions:

(1)  Payee (item 3):  Cross out payee number.

(2)  Name and Address of Payee (item 8A):  Enter the legend "OUT-OF-SYSTEM - CHAPTER 1606" below the address

(3)  Award Data (item 12):

(i)  Dependency (item 12 (B)&(C)):  Leave blank in all instances since no additional allowance is payable for dependents under Chapter 1606 and no apportionment is possible.

(ii)  Entitlement Code (item 12(G)):  Enter entitlement code 01.

(4)  Remarks (item 13):  Show the legend "CHAPTER 1606" and branch of service.  Also enter "Apprenticeship/OJT", or "Correspondence" as appropriate.

(5)  The following items will not be completed for Chapter 1606:

(i)  Initials and Surname of Person Entitled (item 9).

(ii)  Chapter 35 Data (items 14, Veterans Services, & 15, Excess Charge).

(iii)  Enrollment Period (item 19).

(iv)  Extended Entitlement Indicator (item 20).

(v)  Children Data (item 21).

**e.  Stop-Suspend-Resume Payment**.  Prepare VA Form 22-8046, Payment Notice (Stop-Suspend-Resume) (November 1995), in duplicate in accordance with current procedures with the following exceptions:

(1)  Payee No. (item 3):  Cross out payee number.

(2)  Action Codes (item 4):  Check Action Code, cross out file code.

(3)  New Address (item 8):  Enter the legend "OUT-OF-SYSTEM—CHAPTER 1606."

**f.  Disposition of Authorization Actions.**  Forward the original of the authorization action to Buffalo with Optional Form 41, Routing and Transmittal Slip, in accordance with part IV, paragraph 12.13.  Clearly mark the package label "CH 1606 Documents."  The address for the Buffalo RPO is:

Department of Veterans Affairs

PO Box 4616

Buffalo, NY  14240-4616

**4.14  [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]**

---

**4.15  AWARDS FOR COAST GUARD RESERVE MEMBERS REQUIRING ACTION BY THE BUFFALO REGIONAL PROCESSING OFFICE** (See Policy Advisory dated January 27, 2005) **(See RPO Letter 22-06-15**)

---

**a.  Change of Branch to Coast Guard Reserve.**  If a reservist changes from one branch of the Selected Reserve to the Coast Guard Reserve, be sure to complete the 310 screen to enter Coast Guard Reserve as the component in the master record.  To change the component in BDN, enter "310" on the Ready screen and then complete the 310 screen.  BDN will use the current DMDC master record component.  Prepare a hard-copy award according to the instructions in [paragraph 4.13](#413), annotating the "Remarks" section of the VA Form 22-1997 that the claimant was eligible under the previous component.  Send this award to the Buffalo RPO.

**b.  Change of Branch from Coast Guard Reserve.**  If a reservist changes from the Coast Guard Reserve to another branch of the Selected Reserve, and benefits had been authorized under the Coast Guard Reserve record, prepare a hard-copy award according to the instructions in [paragraph 4.13](#413) showing the termination of the Coast Guard award.  Annotate the "Remarks" section of the 22-1997 with the new component and the eligibility date.  Send this award to the Buffalo RPO.  Ask Buffalo to be sure entitlement is properly reflected in the BDN master record for Coast Guard training.

**c.  Supplemental Award for Coast Guard Reserve.**  If a supplemental award is necessary on a Coast Guard Reserve case, and the BDN master record status is other than C (Coast Guard), prepare VA Form 22-1997 and send it to the Buffalo RPO.

**SUBCHAPTER III.  OTHER AUTHORIZATION ISSUES**

**4.16  PRIOR BENEFITS PAID UNDER ANOTHER LAW**

---

See part III, paragraph 3.19.

**4.17 [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]**

---

**4.18  [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]**

---

**4.19  [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]** (**See Policy Advisory - Tuition Assistance 1606 dated 3/5/03)**

---

**4.20  UNPUBLISHED INSTRUCTIONS**

---

When situations which are not specifically addressed in this manual occur, send e-mail to the Policy and Legislative Development Staff at "[VAVBAWAS/CO/225A](mailto:VAVBAWAS/CO/225A?subject=Part%208%3A%20Chapter%204%20-%20Award%20Processing%20and%20Other%20Authorization%20Issues)".  Alternatively, call (202) 273-7187.  The following are examples needing contact:

**a.**  A reservist who is eligible to receive or who is receiving Chapter 1606 benefits is incarcerated for a felony conviction.

**b.**  An erroneous Social Security Number in the master record.

**c.** If, after following the proper award procedures, the system fails to generate the expected result, notify Project Development Staff at "[VAVBAWAS/CO/225D](mailto:222A.VBAVACO@va.gov?subject=Part%208%3A%20Chapter%204%20-%20Award%20Processing%20and%20Other%20Authorization%20Issues)".  Alternatively, call (202) 273-7187.  Be prepared to provide a description of the problem, a description of all actions attempted, and the status of the master record before the action was attempted.  Report apparent problems as soon as they are noticed. *DO NOT* process additional award actions in an attempt to get the system to work.  This makes research of the problem more difficult.

**4.21  MANUAL ENTITLEMENT COMPUTATIONS**

---

BDN computes the claimant's remaining entitlement after an award is authorized and includes this data in the claimant's award letter and in the master record.  Manual computations are necessary in all cases paid outside the BDN system.  The computations for the various types of training are as follows:

**a.  Most Training Types**.  To compute entitlement manually for other than apprenticeship/OJT, correspondence, or flight, use the tables shown in part IV, paragraph  14.05.

*NOTE:  For entitlement purposes, all months are considered to be 30 days in length.*

**b.  Apprenticeship/OJT**.  The first 6 months of the award are charged at .75 of the full-time institutional rate; the second 6 months are charged at .55 of the full-time institutional rate; any training period beyond 12 months is charged at .35 of the full-time institutional rate.

**EXAMPLE:**  An individual with 36 months original entitlement is enrolled in a 2-year OJT program.  The entitlement to be charged for this period is as follows:

|  | ENROLLMENT TIME X NUMBER OF MONTHS | TOTAL ENTITLEMENT CHARGED FOR THE LISTED PERIOD |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  | .75 X   6 = | 4.50 |
|  | .55 X   6 = | 3.30 |
|  | .35 X 12 = | 4.20 |
|  |  | 12.00      months |

The entitlement remaining at the end of this award is 36 - 12.00 or 24 months.

**c.  Correspondence and Flight**.  For correspondence and flight courses, compute the entitlement charge manually by dividing the total amount actually reimbursed to the claimant for lessons serviced or flight training taken, by the full-time institutional monthly rate payable during the month of payment.

**EXAMPLE**:  An individual with 36 months entitlement and a $288.00 full-time institutional rate is enrolled in a correspondence course consisting of 50 lessons with an approved charge of $20 per lesson.  The individual completes 7 lessons and terminates the program before October 1, 1999.  Compute remaining entitlement as follows:

The actual reimbursement should have been 7 X $20 X .55 = $77. 

The entitlement charge is $77/$288.00 = .270 of a month.  ($288 is the full-time rate before October 1, 2004.) 

The remaining entitlement is 36 - 0.31 = 35.73 months.

**d.  Changes In Type of Training**.  See [paragraph 4.13b(4)](#413b4).

**4.22  [ACTIVE SERVICE] ADJUSTMENTS**

---

**a.  Required Adjustments**

(1)  Entitlement Restoration**.**  VA will restore entitlement to individuals who discontinued training while in receipt of Chapter 1606 benefits as a result of being ordered to active duty during a period of authorized service.

(2)  Extended Ending Dates.  VA will extend the ending dates of the period of Chapter 1606 eligibility by the amount of time served on active duty plus 4 months for persons who were eligible for Chapter 1606 when they were discharged from active duty.

**b.  Entitlement Restoration Processing.**  
  
Procedures for restoring entitlement due to mobilization are contained in part IV, chapter 11, subchapter VII.

**c.**  (See Policy Advisory dated 11/21/02 and Policy Advisory dated 10/02/03) Extensions of Chapter 1606 Periods of Eligibility

(1)  Eligibility. VA may extend the ending dates of the periods of Chapter 1606 eligibility of members of the Selected Reserve ordered to active duty under [**10 U.S.C.****12301(a)**](https://gcc02.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=http%3A%2F%2Fuscode.house.gov%2Fview.xhtml%3Freq%3D(title%3A10%2520section%3A12301%2520edition%3Aprelim)&data=05%7C01%7C%7C9c9a341a4c124da4fcde08db98e5d385%7Ce95f1b23abaf45ee821db7ab251ab3bf%7C0%7C0%7C638271885077971443%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C3000%7C%7C%7C&sdata=Y%2BKIzWvKjoPl8jN6x5O%2B84J5RUqpiC8t70GSJhoIq4c%3D&reserved=0), [**12301(d)**](https://gcc02.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=http%3A%2F%2Fuscode.house.gov%2Fview.xhtml%3Freq%3D(title%3A10%2520section%3A12301%2520edition%3Aprelim)&data=05%7C01%7C%7C9c9a341a4c124da4fcde08db98e5d385%7Ce95f1b23abaf45ee821db7ab251ab3bf%7C0%7C0%7C638271885078127674%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C3000%7C%7C%7C&sdata=%2BqrNtmTf7v5i1R6VvuwcLmMBlcUSOS9cqJNNt1uWIT4%3D&reserved=0), [**12301(g)**](https://gcc02.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=http%3A%2F%2Fuscode.house.gov%2Fview.xhtml%3Freq%3D(title%3A10%2520section%3A12301%2520edition%3Aprelim)&data=05%7C01%7C%7C9c9a341a4c124da4fcde08db98e5d385%7Ce95f1b23abaf45ee821db7ab251ab3bf%7C0%7C0%7C638271885078127674%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C3000%7C%7C%7C&sdata=%2BqrNtmTf7v5i1R6VvuwcLmMBlcUSOS9cqJNNt1uWIT4%3D&reserved=0), [**12302**](https://gcc02.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=http%3A%2F%2Fuscode.house.gov%2Fview.xhtml%3Freq%3D(title%3A10%2520section%3A12302%2520edition%3Aprelim)&data=05%7C01%7C%7C9c9a341a4c124da4fcde08db98e5d385%7Ce95f1b23abaf45ee821db7ab251ab3bf%7C0%7C0%7C638271885078127674%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C3000%7C%7C%7C&sdata=ugLS9MW8GOiYnx%2FF2nFfwuDxylx2HhPZjLMHjCjjwQM%3D&reserved=0), [**12304**](https://gcc02.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=http%3A%2F%2Fuscode.house.gov%2Fview.xhtml%3Freq%3D(title%3A10%2520section%3A12304%2520edition%3Aprelim)&data=05%7C01%7C%7C9c9a341a4c124da4fcde08db98e5d385%7Ce95f1b23abaf45ee821db7ab251ab3bf%7C0%7C0%7C638271885078127674%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C3000%7C%7C%7C&sdata=LWn62fUBgor86DjC%2BBkpNnKf%2BZucws7wlDSEGZWSuvM%3D&reserved=0), **[12304a](https://gcc02.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fuscode.house.gov%2Fview.xhtml%3Freq%3D(title%3A10%2520section%3A12304a%2520edition%3Aprelim)%2520OR%2520(granuleid%3AUSC-prelim-title10-section12304a)%26f%3Dtreesort%26edition%3Dprelim%26num%3D0%26jumpTo%3Dtrue&data=05%7C01%7C%7C9c9a341a4c124da4fcde08db98e5d385%7Ce95f1b23abaf45ee821db7ab251ab3bf%7C0%7C0%7C638271885078127674%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C3000%7C%7C%7C&sdata=VCfxsFkaAUvDkDdnYDerWeLvt%2BJ8jjUH%2FAlX4GDwGQc%3D&reserved=0)**, or **[12304b](https://gcc02.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fuscode.house.gov%2Fview.xhtml%3Freq%3D(title%3A10%2520section%3A12304b%2520edition%3Aprelim)%2520OR%2520(granuleid%3AUSC-prelim-title10-section12304b)%26f%3Dtreesort%26edition%3Dprelim%26num%3D0%26jumpTo%3Dtrue&data=05%7C01%7C%7C9c9a341a4c124da4fcde08db98e5d385%7Ce95f1b23abaf45ee821db7ab251ab3bf%7C0%7C0%7C638271885078127674%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C3000%7C%7C%7C&sdata=QkhVH%2BApn5WJEdQCteAI20hE5o6p8zxBkf7PyTHlKsE%3D&reserved=0)**. See Part 3: Chapter 4, 4.09.b for processing procedures. Members ordered to active duty did not have to be eligible for Chapter 1606 before being activated in order to be eligible for the extension.  However, members must be eligible for Chapter 1606 before discharge or release from active duty to be eligible for the extension.

(2)  Review.  Adjudicators will review all Chapter 1606 cases processed to determine whether the members are eligible for an extension of the period of eligibility. 

(3)  Evidence.  Acceptable evidence may consist of a copy of DD Form 214, Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty, showing the beginning and ending dates of the period of active duty and the authority under which the individual was activated or copies of orders for the period of the call-up or transfer.  The authority under which the individual was activated is particularly important to distinguish qualifying periods from normal active reserve duty.

(4)  Award Action.  In order to adjust the delimiting date in the Chapter 1606 BDN system, it is necessary to enter the beginning date of the qualifying period in the "MOB FROM" field and the ending date of the qualifying period in the "MOB TO" field.  (See TG 22-99-5, pages III-22 to III-27.)  The delimiting date will be computed as 14 years from that date.  Send the claimant a dictated letter for his or her new ending date of the period of eligibility.

(5)  BDN Award Letters.  The BDN award letters in the Chapter 1606 system properly advise members that VA may extend the ending date of the period of eligibility due to active duty. 

(6)  (See Policy Advisory dated 4/18/05) Left Selected Reserve.  The eligibility extension provisions generally apply if the claimant leaves the Selected Reserve and eligibility is terminated.  The extension does not apply if the claimant is separated from the Selected Reserve due to unsatisfactory participation.  Upon notification that a claimant has left the Selected Reserve for reasons other than unsatisfactory participation, review the case to determine if an extension is in order.  If an extension is appropriate, allow the BDN computed extension to stand.

(7)  Multiple Extensions.  If a delimiting date can be extended for more than one reason, give the claimant the extension that provides the latest delimiting date. 

(i)  If an eligible Chapter 1606 member is separated from the Selected Reserve because of a disability or is involuntarily separated, the claimant retains eligibility for 14 years from the date of eligibility despite leaving the Selected Reserve.

A.  If such a claimant establishes eligibility to an extension because of a mobilization, add the mobilization extension to the date that the claimant left the Selected Reserve to determine a new delimiting date.

B.  Compare that date with the date 14 years from the date of eligibility.

C.  The claimant's extended delimiting date will be the later of the two dates.

(ii)  If a delimiting date can be extended due to a disability that prevented training, a determination of the proper extended delimiting date cannot be made until the claimant elects the date to start the disability extension.  (See M22-4, pt. III, ch. 4.)  If the claimant has also established eligibility to a mobilization extension, a final determination must be deferred until the disability extension is computed.

A.  Compute the mobilization extended delimiting date.

B.  When the disability extension is granted and the letter is sent to the claimant explaining the date selection procedures, include a paragraph that provides the mobilization delimiting date.

C.  When the claimant elects a starting date and the extended disability delimiting date is determined, compare the two extended delimiting dates.  The new date will be the later of the two.

(iii)  (See Policy Advisory dated 7/27/04)  If a claimant who separates from the Selected Reserve, and whose benefits are continued to the end of a term, subsequently establishes eligibility to a mobilization extension, add the extension to the date the claimant left the Selected Reserve to determine the correct delimiting date.  Do not add the extension to the end of the term.  If the claimant is in training when the extended delimiting date occurs, continue benefits to the end of the term.

**4.23  INVOLUNTARY SEPARATION PROCEDURES**

---

**a.  Evidence Requirements**.  Eligibility requirements, including the dates that separation must have occurred, are contained in paragraph 1.07e.  Accept either of the following forms of evidence as proof of qualifying involuntary separation from the Selected Reserve:

(1)  DoD Screen.  If a claimant has been involuntarily separated from the Selected Reserve, the DoD STATUS on the DoD screen will display "ELIG RETAINED".

(2)  Other Evidence.  If the DoD screen does not indicate an involuntary separation, accept a letter from a reserve or National Guard official or a copy of separation orders that indicate that separation was due to inactivation of a unit or was involuntary under title 10, U.S.C., section 268(b).  Verify the reason for separation with the appropriate reserve contact point.  Request that the eligibility record be updated.  Award benefits based on the verification by the contact point.

**b.  Award Processing**.  Follow normal award processing procedures.  Retain the original date of eligibility in the master record.

**c.  Effective Dates of Awards**.  For a member separated from the Selected Reserve during the dates shown in paragraph 1.07e, apply the following criteria to determine the effective date from which benefits are payable:

(1)  If an award was terminated after the beginning date, because the member left the Selected Reserve or if a claim was disallowed because the member left the Selected Reserve, award benefits for all periods of enrollment after separation from the Selected Reserve.

(2)  Use existing effective date rules for claims received from a member involuntarily separated during the dates shown in paragraph 1.07e.

**d.  Subsequent Termination**.  If an involuntarily separated member is subsequently terminated from the Armed Forces under adverse conditions, he or she is no longer eligible for benefits under this provision.  DoD is responsible for notifying VA if an involuntarily separated member is subsequently terminated under adverse conditions.  If a case involving potentially adverse separation is received, contact the appropriate reserve contact point and accept the contact point's verification as evidence.  Prepare a report of contact for the record.

**SUBCHAPTER IV.  PERIODIC RATE INCREASES**

         
**4.24  [Reserved for Future Use]**

---

**4.25  CHAPTER 1606 SYSTEM CHANGES**

---

The Hines Benefits Delivery Center (BDC) will update the Chapter 1606 BDN system with the new rates by mid-September for a rate increase that is effective on October 1st of that year. (These adjusted rates will be installed unless pending legislation would be signed into law in the immediate future and would change these new rates.)  All awards processed on or after the date of the update will generate October 1st award lines with reason code 37 if the award ends after October 1st.  If legislation is passed after installation of the new rates that would adjust these rates, the BDN rates will be adjusted as soon as possible.

Most awards will be adjusted automatically when the rate increase is installed on BDN.  Some will have to be manually adjusted.  Awards that are entered after the installation that are not automatically adjusted must be manually adjusted.

**4.26  AUTOMATED ADJUSTMENTS**

---

 **a.**  The automated adjustment run is usually scheduled for the first weekend after the Full-File Pass for the month before the effective date of a rate increase.  The Hines BDC will attempt to automatically adjust all records that had awards processed before the new rates were available in the BDN system.

**b.**  The automated adjustment run needs exclusive use of the Chapter 1606 BDN system when trying to adjust records.  Chapter 1606 BDN processing is not available during the weekend of a scheduled adjustment run. 

**c**.  Each RPO will receive a listing, during the week following an adjustment run, showing each record that was not automatically adjusted.  The listing will also show the reason why the record could not be automatically adjusted.

**d.** In the event of legislation delaying installation until after the effective date of the increase, separate instructions will be issued to the RPOs for processing the increase.

**4.27  REVIEW AND ADJUSTMENT OF AWARDS**

---

Review each unadjusted record and take any necessary award action based on the following unadjusted reasons:

**a.  SUSPENSE.**  The only records in suspense that cannot be adjusted are those records that are suspended with reason code 22, death of claimant. 

**b.  DROPPED PRIORS - REVIEW FOR ADJ.**  The automated adjustment run does not calculate entitlement.  If a record has more than 15 award lines, the automated adjustment would result in dropped prior award lines.  When award lines are dropped, dropped prior entitlement must be computed.  These records require amended awards to add the October 1st award line.  GAD/GAP processing will then determine the dropped prior entitlement and make any necessary adjustments. 

**c.  Other Messages.**  If you encounter an "OUT OF BALANCE" unadjusted message, contact the RPO Finance activity.  If you encounter an "E OVERRIDE CASE" message, adjust the master record.

**4.28  COAST GUARD AND ST. LOUIS CASES**

---

**a.  Preparing Awards After Rate Increase is Known.**  Immediately after the effective date of the rate increase, and if the rates are known, include an award line with the new rate on all hard-copy awards to be processed by the Buffalo RPO.

**b.  Cases Not Adjusted.** Do not prepare amended awards solely to provide the rate increase for cases currently being paid by the Buffalo RPO.  The Buffalo RPO will pay benefits at the increased rate for periods after the effective date of the rate increase on cases that were already being paid when the rate increase took effect.

**4.29  ONE-TIME NOTICE**

---

All claimants receiving benefits during the month before the rate increase is effective will receive a letter advising them of the increase.  They will receive a letter, VA Form 22-0291, Chapter 1606 Increased Educational Assistance Allowance.  The letter will advise the Chapter 1606 trainees of the new monthly rates effective October 1st.  Figure 4.01 shows a representation of VA Form 22-0291 for the October 1, 2000 adjustment.

**4.30  END PRODUCT CREDIT**

---

Take a supplemental EPC for each unadjusted record which requires an award action.  Take an EPC 330 for each unadjusted record which requires a review only.

       

| **MGIB-SR INCREASED EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE ALLOWANCE** | | | | | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | |
| The annual cost of living increase in Educational Assistance Allowance for trainees under the Montgomery GI Bill - Selected Reserve (Ch. 1606 of title 10, U.S.C.) has been approved.  The following monthly rates are effective October 1, 2004. | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | |  |
| YOU NEED TAKE NO ACTION.  However, if for some reason your payment for the month of October does not reflect the increased rate, contact us at 1-888-GI-BILL-1 (1-888-442-4551).  You can also contact us on the Internet at **"www.gibill.va.gov".** | | | | | | |
|  | **NEW BASIC MONTHLY RATES** | | | | | |
|  | **TYPE OF**          **TRAINING** | **FULL TIME** | **THREE-QUARTER**  **TIME** | **HALF-TIME** | **LESS**  **THAN**  **HALF-TIME** | |
|  | INSTITUTIONAL | $288.00 | $216.00 | $143.00 | $71.75 | |
|  | COOPERATIVE | $288.00     (Full Time Only) | | | | |
|  | CORRESPONDENCE | Entitlement Charged At The Rate Of 55% of $288.00. | | | | |
|  | APPRENTICESHIP  ON-THE-JOB  TRAINING | First 6 Months  Second 6 Months  Remainder of Program | | $216.00  $158.40  $100.80 |  | |
|  | FLIGHT | Entitlement Charged At The Rate Of 60% of $288.00. | | | | |
|  |  | | | | | |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

Sincerely Yours,

Education Officer

VA Form 22-0291

SEP 2000

**Figure 4.01.  Representation of VA Form 22-0291 – Chapter 1606 Increased Educational Assistance Allowance**