# Part 4: Chapter 8 - Interval Payment

**Part 4: Chapter 8 - Interval Payment**

**NOTE: Intervals are NOT payable for training effective August 1, 2011. (SEC 206 PL 111-377, 38 U.S.C. 3680)**

[8.01  General Restrictions on Interval Payment](#801)  
[8.02  Additional Restrictions for Summer-Term Intervals](#802)  
[8.03  Nonstandard Terms Other Than Summer Terms](#803)  
[8.04  Intervals Between Overlapping Terms](#804)  
[8.05  Delimiting Date Occurs During Interval Between Terms](#805)  
[8.06  Overpayments Involving Interval Pay](#806)  
[8.07  Entitlement Charge for Intervals Between Terms With Non credit Courses](#807)

 

**8.01  GENERAL RESTRICTIONS ON INTERVAL PAYMENT**

---

  **Caution:  Please see Circular**[22-01-01, Education Provisions of Public Laws 106-398 and 106-419](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000058987?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)

**a.** Adjudication must apply the rules in this chapter to all benefit programs covered in this manual except for section 901.

**b**.  An "interval" is the period of time between regularly scheduled terms or other periods of instruction.  "Term," "semester," "quarter," "summer term" and "summer session" have specific meanings (see [PART 01, GENERAL. CHAPTER 02, DEFINITIONS](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000063717?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)).  However, in this chapter "term" means  "semester," "quarter," "summer term," and "summer session" unless otherwise specified.

**c**.  Pay for the interval between terms except in the following cases: (See [Policy Advisory - Interval Pay and Activation September 18, 2006](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000099939?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&))

(1)  Intervals between terms at the same school which span a full calendar month or more.

EXAMPLE:  The interval from December 19, 1990, to February 2, 1991, spans the full calendar month of January.  Therefore, do not pay for this interval. 

(2)  Intervals between terms which exceed 30 days but are less than a full calendar month if the student transfers from one school to another without a change of program.

(3)  Intervals between terms, regardless of length, when the student transfers from one school to another and also changes programs.

*NOTE:  If the student remains in the same school but changes programs, authorize payment for the interval if otherwise appropriate.*

(4)  Intervals between terms, regardless of length, if the student is: 

(a)  On active duty, or

(b)  Training at a less-than-half time rate on the last day of the term preceding the interval;

*NOTE:  The restriction in subparagraph (4)(b) above applies even if a reduction in course load during the last month did not actually result in a reduction in benefits.*

(5)  Intervals which occur between school years at a school which is not organized on a term, quarter or semester basis.

(6)  Intervals between terms for which a student requests, before award authorization, that no benefits be paid.

(7)  (See [RPO Letter 22-07-01](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000062304?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)) Intervals in which the student will exhaust his or her entitlement and it is to the student's advantage not to receive benefits for the interval to conserve entitlement.  (Use FL 22-893, Non-Payment of Benefits During Intervals Between Terms and Repurchase of Entitlement, to explain to the student that benefits have not been authorized for the interval to conserve enough entitlement to allow re enrollment in a subsequent term.)

(8)  Intervals between terms when the student withdraws from all courses in the term preceding the interval or discontinues training before the scheduled start of an interval in a school not organized on a term, quarter or semester basis.

(9)  Intervals which are described in [paragraphs 8.02c](#801c) and [8.03.](#803)

**8.02  ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS FOR SUMMER-TERM INTERVALS**

---

(See [Policy Advisory – Interval Pay & Summer Term In Depth 4/27/2004](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000080429?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)) 

**a**.  [38 CFR 21.4200(b)(5](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14200)) defines a "summer term" as the whole of the period of instruction at a school which takes place between ordinary school years.  A summer term may be divided into several summer sessions.

**b**.  The rule given in subparagraph c below applies to the interval between any term, semester, or quarter, and a summer term or session, as well as to intervals between individual summer sessions.  This rule is in addition to the rules given in paragraph 8.01c(1) through (8). 

**c.**  Do not pay for a summer-term interval which exceeds 30 days unless the summer term is at least 8 weeks long.

EXAMPLE 1:  A student is enrolled full time at the same school as follows: 

| **Beginning Date** | **Ending Date** |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
Student is enrolled at the same school as follows

| 1/12/91 | 5/8/91 | **Spring Semester** |
|  |  | **Summer Term** (9 weeks): |
| 6/10/91 | 7/10/91 | First Session (31 days) |
| 7/20/91 | 8/18/91 | Second Session (30 days) |
| 9/12/91 | 12/18/91 | **Fall Semester** |
|  |  |  |
| **Correct Payment:** | 1/12/91  - full time | 12/19/91 - none |
|  |  |  |

Explanation:  The student is eligible for payment for both the spring-summer and summer-fall intervals since the summer term is at least 8 weeks long and both intervals are less than a full calendar month.  (See [subpar. d](#802d) below on the method for computing the length of a summer term.)  Authorize payment for the interval between the summer sessions since the interval does not exceed 30 days.

EXAMPLE 2:  A student is enrolled 3/4 time at the same school as follows: 

| **Beginning Date** | **Ending Date** |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
Example 2

| 1/12/91 | 5/15/91 | **Spring Semester** |
|  |  | **Summer Term (7 Weeks):** |
| 6/11/91 | 7/10/91 | First Session |
|  |  | -52 days (total) |
| 7/6/91 | 8/1/91 | Second Session |
| 9/7/91 | 12/23/91 | **Fall Semester** |
|  |  |  |
| **Correct Payment:** | 1/12/91  - 3/4 time |  |
|  | 7/6/91   - full time |  |
|  | 7/11/91  - 3/4 time | 8/2/91   - none |
|  | 9/7/91  3/4 time | 12/24/91 - none |

Explanation:  The student is eligible for payment for the spring-summer interval since that interval is less than 30 days although the summer term, which consisted of two overlapping sessions, is less than 8 weeks.

*NOTE:  Although the overlapping days are not counted twice, the combination of the two 3/4 training times constitutes full-time training from July 6, 1991, to July 10, 1991.*

The student is not eligible for payment for the summer-fall interval since that interval is more than 30 days, although less than a full calendar month, and the summer term is less than 8 weeks. 

**d**.  To determine the length of a summer term, count the number of days from the beginning to the end of each session during the summer term that the student will attend as certified by the school.  If the sessions overlap, do not count the overlapping days twice.  Then use one of the methods described below, whichever is to the advantage of the student, to determine whether the 8-week requirement has been met. 

(1)  Only One Rounding Permitted.  First, add the number of days in each session to arrive at the number representing the total days of summer attendance.  Second, divide this sum by 7; consider a remainder of 4 or more days to be a whole week; disregard a remainder of 3 days or less.  If the sessions overlap, do not count the overlapping days twice.

(2)  More Than One Rounding Permitted.  First, divide the number of days in each scheduled session separately by 7.  Consider a remainder of 4 or more days as a whole week; disregard a remainder of 3 days or less.  Second, add the number of weeks in each scheduled session.  If the sessions overlap, do not count the overlapping days twice.  You must compute the length of the summer term by both methods whenever the length of a term is at issue for interval payment.  A difference can occur due to the rounding when dividing the number of days by 7 as indicated by the following examples: 

EXAMPLE 1: 

| **Beginning Date** | **Ending Date** |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
More than One Rounding Permitted - Example 1

|  |  |  |
| 6/15/90 | 7/10/90 | First Summer Session (26 Days) |
|  |  |  |
| 7/13/90 | 8/7/90 | Second Summer Session (26 Days) |

EXAMPLE 2:

| **Beginning Date** | **Ending Date** |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
More than one rounding permitted - Example 2

|  |  |  |
| 6/10/90 | 7/10/90 | First Summer Session (31 Days) |
|  |  |  |
| 7/13/90 | 8/4/90 | Second Summer Session  (23 Days) |

Explanation:  The term in EXAMPLE 1 is 8 weeks long using the method described in [subparagraph (2)](#802d2) above (26 days / 7 = 3 weeks, 5 days, rounded to 4 weeks in each session, or 8 weeks in the term), but only 7 weeks by the method in [subparagraph (1)](#802d1) (26 days + 26 days = 52 days / 7 = 7 weeks, 3 days, rounded to 7 weeks).  In EXAMPLE 2, the term is 8 weeks using [subparagraph (1)](#802d1) (31 days + 23 days = 54 days / 7 = 7 weeks, 5 days, rounded to 8 weeks), but is 7 weeks by the method in [subparagraph (2)](#802d2) (31 days / 7 = 4 weeks, 3 days, rounded to 4 weeks in the first session plus 23 days / 7 = 3 weeks, 2 days, rounded to 3 weeks in the second session, or 7 weeks in the term).  In both examples, use the method which provides a term length of 8 weeks to determine if interval payment is proper.

 

**8.03  NONSTANDARD TERMS OTHER THAN SUMMER TERMS**

---

Some terms, such as accelerated terms scheduled in the fall, winter, or spring, do not meet the definition of a standard "quarter" or "semester" and are not "summer terms" either.  Do not authorize payment for the interval between such nonstandard terms unless they are **consecutive** nonstandard terms.  This rule is in addition to the rules given in paragraph 8.01c(1) through (8). (See [Policy Advisory - Interval Payment and Consecutive Terms](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000063966?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), dated November 8, 2004)

EXAMPLE 1:  A student is enrolled at the same school as follows:

| **Beginning Date** | **Ending Date** |  | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
Example 1 - A student is enrolled at the same school as follows

| 11/4/90 | 12/13/90 | **Term 1** (Student enrolled full time | |
|  |  | in nonstandard term) | |
| 1/6/91 | 1/17/91 | **Term 2** (Student not enrolled) | |
| 1/20/91 | 3/21/91 | **Term 3** (Student enrolled full time | |
|  |  | in nonstandard term) | |
|  |  |  | |
| **Correct Payment:** | 11/4/90  - full time | 12/14/90 - none |  |
|  | 1/20/91  - full time | 3/22/91  - none |  |

Explanation:  The student is not eligible for payment for the interval between terms 1 and 3 because these nonstandard terms are **not consecutive**.

EXAMPLE 2:

| **Beginning Date** | **Ending Date** |  | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
Example 2 - The student is not eligible for payment for the interval between terms 1 and 3 because these nonstandard terms are not consecutive

| 8/26/90 | 12/13/90 | **Term 1** (Student enrolled full time | |
|  |  | in standard semester) | |
| 1/6/91 | 1/17/91 | Term 2 (Student not enrolled in | |
|  |  | nonstandard term) | |
| 1/20/91 | 3/7/91 | Term 3 (Student enrolled full time | |
|  |  | in nonstandard term) | |
|  |  |  | |
| **Correct Payment:** | 8/26/90 - full time | 3/8/91  - none |  |

Explanation:  There is no prohibition against paying for an interval between a standard semester (such as term 1) and a nonstandard term (such as term 3).  If term 1 were a nonstandard term, you would not authorize interval payment since terms 1 and 3 are not consecutive terms.

**8.04  INTERVALS BETWEEN OVERLAPPING TERMS**

---

If a student is enrolled in overlapping terms either before or after an interval (at the same or different schools), determine interval payment as follows: 

**a.** Treat the ending date of each term as though it were the student's last date of training before the interval. 

**b.**  Treat the beginning date of each term as though it were the student's first date of training after the interval. 

**c.**  Review the interval payment which would result from each combination of beginning and ending dates.  Select the combination of ending and beginning dates which would result in the greatest overall payment to the student. 

**d.**  Authorize payment for the interval at the training time in effect on the ending date preceding the interval as determined in [subparagraph c](#804c) above.  VA shall not reduce during the interval, but it shall increase the rate if warranted by such training. 

EXAMPLE: 

| **Beginning Date** | **Ending Date** |  | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
Example

| 9/8/90 | 12/12/90 | 9 credit hours at school A | |
|  |  |  | |
| 9/15/90 | 12/19/90 | 3 credit hours at school B | |
|  |  |  | |
| 1/7/91 | 5/19/91 | 9 credit hours at school A | |
|  |  |  | |
| 1/19/91 | 5/25/91 | 3 credit hours at school B | |
|  |  |  | |
| **Correct Payment:** | 9/8/90  - 3/4 time |  |  |
|  | 9/15/90 - full time |  |  |
|  | 5/20/91 - 1/4 time | 5/26/91 - none |  |

Explanation:  The basis for the interval payment is the December 12, 1990, ending date and the January 19, 1991, beginning date.  Pay the full-time rate for this period since the training time was full time on December 12, 1990.  This combination of ending and beginning dates results in the greatest total payment to the student.  (If the interval payment were based on the December 12, 1990, and January 7, 1991 dates, the student would receive less.  The other possible combinations of ending and beginning dates -  December 19, 1990 and January 7, 1991, or December 19, 1990 and January 19, 1991 -  may not be considered since the training time on December 19, 1990, was less than half time.) 

**8.05  DELIMITING DATE OCCURS DURING INTERVAL BETWEEN TERMS**

---

A student is eligible for education benefits until his or her delimiting date if that date occurs during an interval between terms provided that payment of benefits during the interval is otherwise proper.  If payment for the interval is proper, follow these steps:

**a.** Authorize benefits through the last day of the term preceding the student's delimiting date.

**b.** Establish the proper control (see [Part 3: Chapter 1 - Administrative Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073486?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)) to confirm that the student actually enrolled for the term following the interval.

**c.**  At the end of the control period, contact the school to confirm the student's enrollment during the term following the interval.  Establish local procedures for contacting schools.  If the student is enrolled for this term, authorize benefits for the portion of the interval before the delimiting date.  If the student was not enrolled for this term, no further award action is necessary.

 

**8.06  OVERPAYMENTS INVOLVING INTERVAL PAY**

---

**a.**  Do not create an overpayment for an interval between terms if a student terminates his or her attendance from all courses (without mitigating circumstances) in the term following the interval.  Terminate benefits in this case effective the first day of the following term. 

EXAMPLE:  A student is enrolled full time as follows: 

                          Fall semester from September 15, 1990, to December 19, 1990;

                          Spring semester from January 5, 1991, to May 12, 1991.  

The student's award properly pays benefits through the interval between semesters.  The student began attendance in the spring semester but withdrew from all courses with non punitive grades on March 14, 1991; mitigating circumstances for the withdrawal were not found.  Terminate the award effective January 5, 1991.  Benefits for the interval are not overpaid because the student actually attended a portion of the spring semester after the interval.

**b.**  If a student receives benefits for an interval, but does not actually begin the following term, terminate benefits on the last date of attendance.  In the example in [subparagraph a](#806a) above, if the student did not attend any part of the spring semester, terminate payment effective December 19, 1990.

**8.07  ENTITLEMENT CHARGE FOR INTERVALS BETWEEN TERMS WITH NON CREDIT COURSES**

---

If an eligible person under chapter 35 is enrolled in entitlement free courses (i.e., non credit deficiency, remedial, or refresher courses or high school courses) and interval payment is payable, be sure to charge the proper entitlement for the interval.  Ordinarily, the entitlement charge for the interval is the same as for the preceding term.  However, if the eligible person's 5 months of entitlement free training expires during the interval, begin charging full entitlement on the day after the entitlement free training expires.  (See [Part 7: Chapter 1 - General](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073664?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) for a full explanation of entitlement free training under ch. 35.)