# Part 9: Chapter 4 - Review of Approvals - Specific Criteria for Correspondence Schools, Flight Schools, and Job Training Establishments

**Part  9: Chapter 4 - Review of Approvals - Specific Criteria for Correspondence Schools, Flight Schools, and Job Training Establishments**

   
[**Subchapter 1. Specific Criteria for Correspondence Schools**](#SI)  
[4.01  Nonaccredited Correspondence Schools](#401)  
[4.02  Percentage Of Students Completing Correspondence Courses](#402)  
[4.03  Enrollment Agreements](#403)  
[4.04  Refund Policies](#404)  
[4.05  Combination Correspondence — Residence Programs](#405)  
[4.06  Maintaining Approval Data](#406)  
[4.07  Inquiries On Correspondence Approvals](#407)  
  
[**Subchapter 2. Specific Criteria for Flight Schools**](#SII)  
[4.08  Federal Aviation Administration](#408)  
[4.09  Approval Requirements](#409)  
[4.10  Approval Packages](#410)  
[4.11  Specific Flight School Requirements](#411)  
[4.12  Types of Individual Courses](#412)  
[4.13  Flight Training Centers](#413)  
[4.14  Flight Simulators and Flight Training Devices](#414)  
[4.15  Concurrent Enrollment](#415)  
[4.16  VACERT for Windows](#416)  
  
[**Subchapter 3. Specific Criteria for Job Training Establishments**](#SIII)  
[4.17  Applications to SAAs](#417)  
[4.18  Approval Requirements for Apprenticeship and OJT Programs](#418)  
[4.19  Definitions - Registered Apprenticeship Programs](#419)  
[4.20  Special Issues - Registered Apprenticeship Programs](#420)  
[4.21  Special Issues - Unregistered Apprenticeship Programs](#421)  
[4.22  Special Issues - Other OJT Programs](#422)  
  
**Appendices**  
[A. Glossary of Terms Pertaining to Flight Training](#A)  
[B. VA Approval of Flight Schools](#b)  
[C. FAA Minimum and VA Maximum Lengths for Flight Courses](#c)  
[D. Examples of Course Approval Issues](#d)  
[E. Maximum Hours for Flight Simulators and Flight Training Devices, Part 141  Vs. Part 142](#e)  
[F. VA Approval of Apprenticeship and Other OJT Programs](#f)

**SUBCHAPTER I.  SPECIFIC CRITERIA FOR CORRESPONDENCE SCHOOLS**

**4.01  NONACCREDITED CORRESPONDENCE SCHOOLS**

---

Public Law 104-446 provided for discontinuing the approvals of nonaccredited correspondence schools after February 2, 1995.  Benefit payments to VA students enrolled before that date were continued.  The provisions of approval of nonaccredited correspondence schools contained in Part 9: Chapter 2 - Review of Approvals - Overview  remained in effect until these VA students completed or otherwise terminated their enrollment and the approval was no longer an issue.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**4.02  PERCENTAGE OF STUDENTS COMPLETING CORRESPONDENCE COURSES**

---

**a.  General.**  [Public Law 103-446](http://uscode.house.gov/statviewer.htm?volume=108&page=4645) added a completion requirement.  For original or revised approvals effective after February 2, 1995, the SAA (State Approving Agencies) must verify that 50 percent or more of the students who completed a correspondence course required a minimum of 6 months.

**b.  Records.**  Correspondence schools must maintain the necessary records for the SAA to verify that 50 percent or more of the students who completed the course required a minimum of 6 months.

**c.  Certification and Period Covered.**  Correspondence schools must certify that at least 50 percent of the students pursuing a correspondence program or the correspondence portion of a combined correspondence–residence course require more than 6 months to complete it.  The period covered by the certification must be the 6 months immediately preceding the request for approval of the program or course.

**d.  Single Course or a Series of Courses.** A correspondence program may consist of a single course.  Or, a program may be a series of correspondence courses if the school can show that students normally pursue a series of courses sequentially leading to a single objective.  All the courses may be combined to determine if the 6 month completion time requirement is met.  For example, Courses A, B, and C are normally taken sequentially.  The school’s records show that 50 percent of the students completing course A required 3 month to complete, 50 percent of the students completing course B required 1 month, and 50 percent of the students completing course C required 2 months.  All the courses may be approved as part of the program because 50 percent of the students completing the whole program required 6 months.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**4.03  ENROLLMENT AGREEMENTS**

---

**a.  General.** To maintain their approvals, correspondence schools must complete enrollment agreements that fully disclose the obligations of both the schools and students.  These agreements shall include, in a prominent display the conditions for affirmation, termination, refund, and payment of VA education allowance.

**b.  Disposition.** Copies of these agreements shall be given to all VA students after they are signed.

**c.  Affirmation of Enrollment.** The agreements will not be effective unless VA students sign and submit to VA written statements (with signed copies to the schools) specifically affirming the agreements.  VA students must sign and submit the affirmations no earlier than 10 calendar days after they signed the agreements. 

**d.  Refunds.**  If VA students notify schools of their intention not to affirm the agreements, the schools are required to promptly refund in full any advance fees paid to the schools.  Part 4: Chapter 2 - Flight and Correspondence Training

[Back to Top](##Top)

**4.04  REFUND POLICIES**

---

**a.  Minimum Requirements.**  If VA students terminate affirmed enrollments in accredited courses, charges or refunds will be computed according to the following schedule:

(1)  If no lessons have been completed, a registration fee not in excess of 10 percent of the tuition for the course or $50.00, whichever is lesser, may be charged.

(2)  If the termination occurs after completion of less than 25 percent of the lessons, the school may retain the registration fee plus 25 percent of the tuition for the course.

(3)  If the termination occurs after completion of more than 25 percent but less than 50 percent of the lessons, the school may retain the registration fee plus 50 percent of the tuition for the course.

(4)  If the termination occurs after completion of more than 50 percent of the lessons, no refund is required.

**b.  More Liberal Policies.**  If schools have or adopt refund policies that are more favorable to VA students than those shown above, then the school policies will be applicable.

**c.  Time Limit.**  Any refund due must be made within 40 days of receipt of termination to be considered timely.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**4.05  COMBINATION CORRESPONDENCE — RESIDENCE PROGRAMS**

---

**a.  Conditions.**  VA students may pursue programs of education partly in residence and partly by correspondence under the following conditions:

(1)  The correspondence and residence portions are pursued sequentially.

(2)  The schools permit students to pursue part of the courses by correspondence in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the attainment of the specified objectives.

(3)  The total credit established by correspondence does not exceed the maximum credit that the schools will grant toward the specified objective.

**b.  Certification.**  Schools must certify to VA that they meet all requirements of law, including [38 U.S.C. 3680(a)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3680 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3680)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) and [3686](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3686 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3686)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true).

**c.  Approval of Combination Correspondence–Residence Programs**

(1)  The SAA may approve combined programs if the correspondence and residence portions are pursued sequentially and the credit earned during the correspondence portion does not exceed the maximum hours required for the completion of the program.

(2)  The SAA may not combine correspondence–resident courses into programs.  However, the SAA may combine the correspondence and residence portions when computing the 6 month completion requirement.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**4.06  MAINTAINING APPROVAL DATA**

---

VACO EDU assigned staff will assign Education and Training Institution’s facility code and maintain the approval record in WEAMS (Web Enabled Approval Management System). Submission of approval applications and associated documents are managed within the Salesforce approval module reference Part 9, 8.01.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**4.07  INQUIRIES ON CORRESPONDENCE APPROVALS**

---

Inquiries relating to the approval of correspondence courses that cannot be answered after reviewing the WEAMS record will be referred to the ELR with jurisdiction of the school.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**SUBCHAPTER II.  SPECIFIC CRITERIA FOR FLIGHT SCHOOLS**

**4.08  FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION**

---

**a.  The Role of the FAA.**  The FAA (Federal Aviation Administration) has FSDOs (Flight Standard District Offices) that administer flight training regulations.  The FAA regulations are divided into separate parts that address different aspects of flight training.  The SAA may not approve flight training courses unless they are approved by FSDOs under FAR (Federal Aviation Regulations) part 141 or 142 except for flight engineer courses.  Flight engineer courses must be approved by FSDOs under FAR part 63.  The SAA may not approve courses approved by FSDOs under FAR part 61.

*NOTE:  ELRs should establish a contact point with each FSDO responsible for approving flight schools in their jurisdiction.  The Operations Branch can answer technical questions about flight training.  ELRs should obtain copies of parts 61, 63, 141, and 142, from their local FSDO and become familiar with the FAA's approval requirements.  The FAA's minimum requirements are in the appendices to parts 61, 63, 141, and 142.*

**b.  Certification.**  A flight school submits a TCO (Training Course Outline) and syllabus to the FSDO for each course they desire to have approved.  The TCO specifies training sites, aircraft, the Chief Flight Instructor, the Assistant Chief Flight Instructor, and the airports used during cross country flights.  The syllabus contains detailed information about the course.  It contains the hours for each component of the course and the total hours of dual, solo, and ground training.  If course outline, syllabus, and flight school meet the requirements of part 141, the FSDO issues  a provisional pilot school certificate listing the courses approved under part 141.

(1)  The holder of a provisional certificate may apply for a non-provisional certificate not later than 30 days before the provisional certificate expires.

(2)  A provisional certificate may not be renewed.  If an application for a non-provisional certificate is not approved by the FSDO, the holder of a provisional certificate may not re-apply for a provisional certificate until 180 days after the expiration of the current provisional certificate.

(3)  FSDOs do not issue a non-provisional certificate until:

(i)  Twenty four (24) months have passed.

(ii)  The flight school has trained at least 10 applicants and recommended those applicants for pilot certificates and ratings.

(iii)  At least 8 of the 10 most recent graduates tested by FAA inspectors or designated pilot examiners passed the required tests on the first attempt.

(4)  The flight school must renew their non-provisional certificate every 24 months.

**c.  Training Course Outline and Syllabus.**  The TCO and syllabus submitted to the FSDOs must have the minimum number of hours of training required by part 141 and must specify the number of hours.

(1)  Flight Instruction.  Flight instruction may consist of dual and solo training.  The course approval will show the breakdown between dual and solo flight training.  Dual flight training refers to 2 people, the instructor and the  student, participating in the flight of an aircraft.  The student flies the aircraft while the instructor provides the training.  Solo flight training refers to one person, the student, flying by himself or herself, thereby gaining first hand experience.

(2)  Preflight Briefings and Post-flight Critiques.  The approval may include preflight briefings and post-flight critiques although the FAA does not require them.  "Ground training" as used in the FAA regulations refers to ground school.  The FAA encourages flight schools and training centers to include preflight briefings and post-flight critiques in all courses.

(3)  Ground School.  Ground school (or ground training) prepares a student to take the FAA written examination.  Ground school is an essential part of the course.

(i)  Ground school may consist of units using audiovisual equipment, personal computers, quizzes, and examinations.  Unit instruction is acceptable if the SAA or the ELR acting as the SAA sets clear boundaries for its use.  Ground school must be in residence and under the direction and supervision of qualified instructors.  It must provide for interaction between the instructor and the student.  The use of audiovisual equipment and personal computers may reduce lecture time.  A statement that an instructor is available for questions does not meet the requirement that instruction must be "in residence" and under the direction and supervision of a qualified instructor.

*NOTE:  In ground training programs that consist of unit courses, the students may take varying lengths of time to complete each unit,  Approvals may show cost per unit rather than cost per hour.*

(ii)  The FAA permits a student to take a written examination before completing the ground school portion of a course.  If a student passes the written examination before starting a course, the flight school or training center should credit the student with 50 percent or more of the required ground school hours in the course.  If the student completed ground school training at a certificated flight school before enrolling in the current flight course, the school or training center should give the student full credit for the previous training.  If a student passes the written examination during ground school training, the flight school or training center should shorten the ground school portion by granting credit.  [FAR 141.77](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=b6e2a3520bebf1cfef343ca5785b5a87&mc=true&node=se14.3.141_177&rgn=div8) requires that a student complete all the course requirements to graduate.  Even after a student passes the FAA written examination, VA may pay benefits for the hours of ground school needed to complete the course requirements.

(iii)  The FAA permits a flight school or training center with examining authority to grant credit for training completed at another flight school or training center.  The previous regulation required that the student had to take the entire course in order for the flight school or training center to recommend the student for the issuance of a certificate without the student having to take the FAA written and practical examinations.

(iv)  VA may not pay for individual tutoring at a rate higher than the rate approved for group instruction.

*NOTE:  Flight schools and flight training use terms that may not be familiar to ELRs or may be used with other types of training.  [Appendix A](#A) contains a listing of terms unique to flight schools and  flight training, and their definitions.*

[Back to Top](##Top)

**4.09  APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS**

---

Vocational flight courses may be approved only if they are offered by flight schools or flight training centers approved by the FAA.

**a.  Flight Schools.**  A flight school must have a pilot school or provisional pilot school certificate issued by the FAA under part 141 specifying each course the school is approved to offer.   A flight school may be approved by the FAA to offer a flight engineer course under part 63.  A flight school approved by the FAA under part 61 may not be approved for VA purposes.  Consequently, military aero clubs, air carriers, or IHLs (Institutions of Higher Learning) with proper certificates may be considered as flight schools for VA purposes.

**b.  Flight Training Centers.**  A flight training center or air carrier desiring to use flight simulators or flight training devices for more hours than allowed by part 141 must request a special approval from the FAA.  Before August 1, 1996, a flight training center or carrier had to have a grant of exemption issued under part 61.  Effective August 1, 1996, a flight training center or carrier must have a training center certificate and training specification document issued under part 142.

**c.  SAA Responsibility.**  The SAA is responsible for approving flight schools in its jurisdiction.  This does not include aero clubs established, formed and operated under authority of service department regulations as a non-appropriated sundry fund activity.  Aero clubs are instruments of the federal government.  Approval of courses offered under the auspices of the federal government is the responsibility of VA.  Part 9: Chapter 5 - Programs Approved by Other Than State Approving Agencies  The ELR serves as the approving agency for flight schools if the state declines or fails to designate an SAA or the Director, Education Service, determines that the SAA cannot adequately fulfill the requirements for program approvals.  Appendix B contains the procedures for the ELR to function as the SAA for approval of flight schools.

**d.  Standard College Degree Programs.**  Courses of flight training leading to standard college degrees may be approved even though the IHL offering the degree is not a flight school or flight training center as defined above.  Though private pilot training may be included in the approval of such degree programs, the courses themselves are subject to the provisions of [38 CFR 21.4253](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=72dffd8e8bef189a63dfcd314134fc2c&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14253) or [21.4254.](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=72dffd8e8bef189a63dfcd314134fc2c&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14254)  Part 4: Chapter 2 - Flight and Correspondence Training

**e.  Exclusion.**  Except for the provision cited in subparagraph d above, private pilot, student pilot, recreational pilot, and test courses may not be approved by the SAA.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**4.10  APPROVAL PACKAGES**

---

**a.  General.**  A flight approval should show the maximum number of hours of dual and solo flight training, preflight briefings, post-flight critiques, and ground school.  If the state or local government taxes flight training, the approval should include the taxes.  The SAA or the ELR acting as the SAA may approve upper and lower limits for hourly rates for aircraft to avoid having to frequently revise the approval.  The approval should show the upper limits for hourly rates for aircraft.  The approval must show the type of aircraft, horsepower, dual and solo rates, and the courses the aircraft may be used for.  It is not necessary to list the tail numbers of each approved aircraft.

**b.  Complete Programs.** Flight schools and training centers must offer complete programs, including ground school.  It is not necessary for VA students to be entitled to benefits for all the training.  For example, a flight school or training center may offer an audiovisual, home study, or personal computer ground school program.  If the FSDO approved the arrangement, the ELR may accept the approval even though VA students may not receive benefits for the audiovisual, home study, or personal computer course.  The ELR must send a letter notifying the flight school or training center that VA students must complete all the requirements for the course but that charges for the audiovisual, home study, or personal computer courses may not be approved by VA and are not reimbursable.

**c.  Contracting.**  Flight schools and training centers may contract out portions of the training.  The flight schools or training centers providing the actual training must be approved.  The SAA or the ELR acting as the SAA should provide copies of contracts with the approval.

*NOTE:  If flight school and training centers contract out portions of the training, both the flight schools or training centers and the contractors must be approved.  Both the flight schools or training centers and the contractors must meet the 2-year rule.  If the contractor is  not in the same state as the flight school or training center, they must be approved as a separate facility and meet the 2-year rule.*

**d.  Standards of Progress.**  Flight schools and training centers must have approved standards of progress based upon a minimum number of hours of training in a given period.  The standards of progress do not have to specify the type of hours, for example, dual or solo flight training, preflight briefings and post-flight critiques, or ground school.  Flight schools and training centers must terminate students who fail to meet the standards of progress.  The standards of progress must be compatible with the overall length of the course and the average completion time.  For example, a standard that requires 15 hours of training every 90 days would be acceptable for a commercial pilot course, but not for a type rating course that is normally completed in 3 weeks.

**e.  Two-Year Rule**

(1)  Flight schools and training centers may use part 61 advanced flight training to establish proof of continuous operation to meet the 2-year rule for approval.  Flight schools and training centers must have offered advanced flight courses, i.e., a commercial pilot certification course and above.  To establish continuous operation, the records must show at least one hour of advanced training during each 90-day period for the 2 years before the effective date of approval.

(2)  Under the revised regulations, branches must meet the 2-year rule.

*NOTE:  Even though VA will not authorize benefits for flight training under part 61, the SAA may use part 61 training to determine if schools have been continuously operating for 2 years.*

[Back to Top](##Top)

**4.11  SPECIFIC FLIGHT SCHOOL REQUIREMENTS**

---

**a.  Records.** Flight schools must maintain adequate systems of records.  At a minimum, this should include:

(1)  A copy of the private pilot's license of each VA student.

(2)  Evidence that each VA student has completed any previous training that may be a prerequisite for the course.

(3)  A copy of the appropriate medical certificate for the course being pursued by each VA student.  Additionally, flight schools must maintain copies of all medical certificates (expired or otherwise) needed to support all periods of training at the school.

*NOTE 1:  FAA regulations require only that students qualify for the appropriate medical certificates before the issuance of the objective licenses.  VA regulations require that VA students possess the appropriate medical certificates before entering training and continuously while in training.  VA students cannot receive benefits for training completed without the prescribed medical certifications.  Benefits cannot be paid retroactively.*

*NOTE 2:  [Public Law 105-368](https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-105publ368/pdf/PLAW-105publ368.pdf), the Veterans Programs Enhancement Act of 1998, amended the medical certificate requirements for vocational flight training courses beginning on or after October 1, 1998.  VA students must still possess the appropriate medical certificates before entering training courses.  However, the requirement to continue to have the appropriate medical certificates while pursuing training has been eliminated.*

(4)  A copy of the daily flight log for each VA student.

(5)  A copy of the permanent ground school record for each VA student.

(6)  A progress log for each VA student.

(7)  An invoice of flight charges for individual flights.

(8)  Daily flight sheets identifying records upon which the 85-15 percent ratio may be computed.

(9)  A continuous hour meter record for each aircraft.

(10)  Invoice or flight tickets signed by the student and instructor showing hour meter reading, type of aircraft and aircraft identification number.

(11)  An accounts receivable ledger.

(12)  Individual instructor records.

(13)  Engine log books.

(14)  A record for each student above the private pilot level stating the name of the course in which the student is enrolled and indicating whether the student is enrolled under part 61, 63, 141, or 142.

(15)  Records of tuition and accounts that show the tuition charged and received from all students.

**b.  Credit for Previous Training.**  Flight schools must grant appropriate credit for all previous training and shorten the student's current flight course proportionately.  Part 4: Chapter 2 - Flight and Correspondence Training

*NOTE:  Although the law does not define "appropriate credit", a pattern of not granting adequate credit is a violation of [38 U.S.C. 3675 (b)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3675 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3675)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) or [3676 (c)(4).](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3676 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3676)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) Consistent abuse in this respect is a matter for referral to the appropriate SAA.*

**c.  Maximum Hours**

(1)  The FAA does not establish maximum hours of flight and ground training for courses.

(i)  For VA purposes, the maximum number of dual flight training hours that may be approved is 120 percent of the FAA's minimum hourly requirement.  A flight school or training center must submit a FSDO-approved TCO and syllabus or a training specification document for each course they want approved.  The approval may not be for more hours than the FSDO-approved TCO or training specification document.  If the FSDO-approved TCO and syllabus or training specification document is for more than 120 percent of the FAA minimums, the SAA or the ELR acting as the SAA will restrict the approval to 120 percent, unless the Director, Education Service, grants a waiver.  (See [subparagraph f below](#411f).)  (See Appendix C for minimum and maximum hours for courses in the part 141 appendices.  See [Appendix D](#d) for examples of course approvals involving the FAA minimum and VA maximum hours.)

(ii)  The maximum hours for solo flight training in the commercial pilot certification course is the minimum number of hours required by the FAA with one exception.  The number of hours of solo flight training may be increased so that the total dual and solo hours equals the minimum flight training hours required for the certificate.  (See [Appendix C](#c) for additional information.)

(iii)  The maximum hours for ground school may not exceed the number of hours contained in the FSDO-approved TCO and syllabus or training specification document.

(iv)  The maximum hours for preflight briefings and post-flight critiques may not exceed 25 percent of the total hours of flight training.

(2)  The FAA has established maximum hours for flight training conducted in flight simulators and  flight training devices for some courses.  The maximum number of hours of dual flight training in a flight simulator or flight training device that may be approved is the maximum number of hours of instruction permitted by part 61 for a course when:

(i)  The course is offered entirely or partially by flight simulator or flight training device by a flight training center with a part 142 training center certificate; and

(ii)  Part 61 contains a maximum number of hours of instruction by flight simulator or flight training device for the course.

(3)  If the course is offered entirely or partially by flight simulator or flight training device and part 61 does not specify a maximum number of hours, the SAA or the ELR acting as the SAA will restrict the number of hours in the course to the number in the training specification document.  See Appendix E for a comparison of the differences between parts 141 and 142 for hours in flight simulators and flight training devices.

**d.  Minimum Hours.**  Part 141 appendices prescribe the minimum hourly requirements for flight courses.  Part 141 revised allows a flight school or training center to develop a course that will get students to their objectives without regard to the number of hours in the appendices.  The SAA or the ELR acting as the SAA may approve a course with less than the minimum number of hours in the appendices.

**e.  Less than the Minimum Hours.** A flight school or training center with examining authority may be approved to offer a course with less than the minimum number of hours specified in the appendices.  The flight school or training center will develop a course that will get students to their objectives.  This may result in a flight school or training center customizing its courses for their students.  A flight school or a training center has the option of requesting approval of courses that meet the minimum requirements in the appendices and certifying students for fewer hours, or requesting approval of  courses with fewer than the minimum requirements.

**f.  Waivers.** A flight school or training center may have a FSDO-approved TCO and syllabus for more hours of dual flight training than permitted by [subparagraph c(1](#411c1)) above.  The school or center may request an administrative review by the Director, Education Service.  The school or center must submit a written request to the RPO (Regional Processing Office) Director stating the reason(s) why  the additional hours should be approved and including any evidence supporting the additional hours.  The CELO (Chief Education Liaison Officer) should review the request.  If the SAA approved the course, the CELO should send a copy of the letter asking the SAA to review the letter and provide comments within 30 days.  The CELO should send a copy of the letter to the ELR who processed the approval and ask the ELR to provide comments within 30 days.  The complete package consisting of the request, the SAA’s comments, the ELR’s comments, and the  CELO’s comments should be sent to the Director, Education Service for a decision.

**g.  Charges.**  The SAA will approve charges for aircraft rentals, ground school, and instructor fees for each course.

(1)  Approved charges must be based on charges to similarly circumstanced non-VA students.

(2)  Charges for books, supplies and lodging associated with flight training may not be included in approved reimbursable charges.

(3)  VA students or groups of VA and non-VA students may own an airplane, lease it to the flight school, and have exclusive use of the aircraft for flight training.  The aircraft must meet the requirements prescribed for other aircraft used in the course.  This leasing arrangement should not result in the charges for the students owning the aircraft being greater than charges to other students not involved in such leasing arrangements.

(4)  If flight club membership entitles VA students to training at less than the standard rates, educational benefits will be based on the reduced rates.  Any club entrance fees are not reimbursable since the fees are not for flight training.

**h.  Substitution of Aircraft.** Except for minor variations, VA students may only train in the specific aircraft approved for the course.  If an aircraft is not available to VA students for a compelling reason, a substitute aircraft may be utilized provided it meets the training requirements for the approved course.

(1)  All substitutions should be explained in the remarks section of VA Forms 22-6553c, Monthly Certification of Flight Training, or 22-6553c-1, Monthly Certification of Flight Training (electronic version).

(2)  If the charges for the substitute aircraft are different than those for the approved aircraft, reimbursement will be based on the lesser charge.

(3)  If substitutions become prevalent, VA may suspend payments to VA students and refer the matter to the SAA.

**i.  85-15 Percent Ratio.**  The 85-15 percent ratio requirement in [38 CFR 21.4201](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=37261b14024e8c67b744f5da255d7ade&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14201) must be met by flight courses before the enrollments or reenrollments of VA students may be approved.  The ratio may be calculated using VA student hours versus non-VA student hours over the 30 day period before the VA student enrolls rather than on a comparison of the number of VA students enrolled versus the number of non-VA students.  M22-4, Part 10, Compliance Survey. Chapter 04, Procedures Applicable to Facilities Offering Specific Types of Training.

**j.  Flight Tests.** Additional hours for FAA check rides may not be approved unless the FAA requires that a licensed pilot be present during the flight test.  This does not include the final "stage check" with the chief flight instructor, if the final check is included in the TCO, syllabus, or training specification document.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**4.12  TYPES OF INDIVIDUAL COURSES**

---

**a.  Private Pilot or Recreational Certificates.**  VA benefits may not be authorized for  private pilot or recreational certificate courses because the objective is considered to be avocational.

**b.  Commercial Pilot Courses**

(1)  Categories.  Commercial pilot certificates may be obtained in the following eight categories: airplane single-engine; airplane multiengine; rotorcraft-helicopter; rotorcraft gyroplane; powered-lift; glider; lighter-than-air airship; and lighter-than-air balloon.  Flight schools and training centers may be approved to offer multiple commercial pilot certification courses.

(2)  Flight Hours

(i)  A commercial pilot certification course for an airplane, single or multiengine, or a powered lift requires a minimum of 120 hours of flight training.  It requires a minimum of 55 hours of flight training from a certificated flight instructor and a minimum of 10 hours of solo flight training.  An approval may contain a maximum of 65 hours of solo flight training.

(ii)  The 120 percent rule only applies to dual hours.  It cannot be applied to the total number of hours of flight training.  Therefore, the maximum number of dual hours of flight training from a certificated flight instructor cannot exceed 66 hours.  With a maximum of 65 hours of solo flight training, a commercial pilot certification course for an airplane, single or multiengine, or a powered lift could contain a maximum of 131 hours of flight training.  See Appendix C for the minimum and maximum number of hours of dual, solo, ground training, and preflight briefings and post-flight critiques for the other categories.

**c.  Instrument Rating.** This rating is required to fly at night, during certain types of weather, and for certain cross country conditions.    (See [par. 4.15](#415) below for additional information regarding concurrent enrollment.)

**d.  Multiengine.**  This rating is required to fly multiengine aircraft.

**e.  Instructor.**  This rating is required to teach flight training.  Students may go on to pursue instructor courses that qualify them to teach the instrument phase of the commercial pilot course or instrument ratings.  Students may also pursue instructor courses to teach in multiengine aircraft and rotorcraft (i.e., helicopters).

**f.  Ground Instructor Courses.**  Ground instructor training was previously contained in part 143.  The regulation is now in part 141 revised.  Effective August 4, 1997, ground instructor courses may be approved.  Students do not have to have private pilot certificates or second class medical certificates to receive benefits for ground instructor courses.

**g.  Flight Engineer Courses.**  Flight engineer courses are approved under part 63.  The FAA has only one flight engineer certificate.  The FAA will issue endorsements to the certificate for the aircraft on which the engineer is qualified to serve.  A student may receive benefits for additional add-on training for an endorsement even if the student has a flight engineer certificate.  The flight school does not have to be approved to offer the additional add-on training.  The flight school must be approved to offer the flight engineer course.

**h.  Airline Transport Pilot.**  This rating is required for pilots in command of turbojets with a passenger seating capacity of more than 10 and for any multiengine aircraft in commuter airline operations.  It is also required for pilots of helicopters engaged in interstate air transportation within the 48 states.  Students must have completed 1,500 hours of flight time in command of aircraft before enrolling in this course.   (For additional information on the requirements for an airline transport pilot certificate, see [14 CFR Part 61, subpart G](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=c9aa242f14897e761bf930fe1236d3f6&mc=true&node=pt14.2.61&rgn=div5#sp14.2.61.g).)

**i.  Optional Ratings.**  Educational benefits may be paid for glider, free balloon, and aerobatics flight training leading to vocational objectives.  When VA students wish to add one of these ratings to a commercial pilot's certificate, they must establish that the purpose of taking the course is vocational rather than recreational or avocational.  Evidence submitted by the student may include, but is not limited to statements from the flight school or from prospective employers.  (See Part 4: Chapter 2 - Flight and Correspondence Training for additional information.)

[Back to Top](##Top)

**4.13  FLIGHT TRAINING CENTERS**

---

**a.  General.**  The FAA approves flight training centers and air carriers for aircraft type rating  and flight engineer courses.  Before August 1, 1996, a flight training center or air carrier was issued a grant of exemption under part 61.  The grant allowed the flight training center or air carrier to use flight simulators or flight training devices for large portions of the training.  The flight training center or air carrier could contract with airlines to provide the training.  The actual flight training may have occurred at locations other than the permanent location of the flight training center or air carrier.  The flight training center or air carriers may not have specified the exact aircraft.  They should provide the make and model, for example, a Boeing 727 or a McDonnell Douglas DC-9.  The flight training center or air carrier must  maintain the training records at its permanent address.

**b.  Part 141 and 142 Certificates.**  Effective August 1, 1996, a flight training center or air carrier may hold  a part 141 air agency certificate or a part 142 training center certificate.  They must hold a training center certificate if the hours of training in flight simulator or flight training device is greater than the maximum amount allowed under part 141 revised.  The flight training center may be approved to offer courses other than aircraft type ratings and flight engineer courses.  The FAA will specify the courses the flight training center is approved to offer in the training specification document.

**c.  Location of Training.** For VA purposes, training in flight simulator or training devices is flight training.  It may be pursued at any location within the United States. The grant of exemption and the training center certificate should list each location.  Each location should be identified in the approval.  For VA purposes, ground school is resident training included in a program of vocational flight training.  It may only be approved when offered at approved locations.

**d.  Minimum Length and 120 Percent Rule.**  Since the grant of exemption allowed the flight training center or air carrier to operate without meeting the part 141 provisions, the minimum course lengths contained in the part 141 appendices did not apply to their courses.  The 120 percent rule for determining the maximum length of courses does not apply to courses offered by a flight training center or air carrier operating under a training center certificate.  The SAA and ELR can accept the number of hours approved by the FAA for these courses.

**e**.** Training Center Certificates.**  Effective August 1, 1996, the FAA stopped issuing grants of exemption.  A flight training center or air carrier that meets the qualifications in part 142 is issued a training center certificate and a training specification document.

(1)  The training center certificate is issued by the FAA if the flight training center or air carrier show they have adequate facilities, equipment, and personnel to offer the requested courses.

(2)  The training specification document is issued by the FAA.  It describes the training programs, checking and testing authorizations, and any limitations imposed by the FAA.  It specifies the requirements for the training programs approved by the FAA.  Satellite training centers in the United States must be approved by the FAA and listed on the training specification document.

**f.  Contracting.**  Part 141 flight schools may contract out all or part of its training to part 142 training centers.  Likewise, part 142 training centers may contract out all or part of its training to part 141 flight schools.  VA regulations governing contractual relationships are applicable in these cases.

**g.  Foreign Training Centers.**  Part 142 allows foreign flight training centers to qualify for training certificates.  However, VA regulations prohibit payment of education benefits for vocational flight training pursued outside the United States.  Foreign training centers may be approved to offer courses within the United States if they meet all the approval requirements and the 2-year rule.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**4.14  FLIGHT SIMULATORS AND FLIGHT TRAINING DEVICES**

---

A flight school or a flight training center may include training in flight simulators and flight training devices if they are representative of the aircraft for which the course is approved and the training is given by a flight instructor.  For reporting purposes, the hours of training in flight simulators and flight training devices are dual instruction.  On VA Forms 22-1999, Enrollment Certification, and 22-1999-4, Enrollment Certification – Flight Training (electronic version), school officials should include the hours of training in flight simulators and flight training devices in the number of hours of dual training in the current course.  On VA Forms 22-6553c and 22-6553c-1, school officials should show the hours of training in flight simulators and flight training devices as dual instruction.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**4.15  CONCURRENT ENROLLMENT**

---

**a.  Restriction.**  The only time VA students may receive benefits for a concurrent enrollment in vocational flight training is when they are pursing the commercial pilot certification airplane single-engine, airplane multiengine, helicopter,  or powered-lift and instrument rating courses.  Adjudicators will deny benefits for concurrent enrollments in other flight courses.

**b.  Enrollment Certifications.**  The flight school or flight training center must submit 2 enrollment certifications, one for a commercial pilot certification course and one for an instrument rating course.

**c.  Award Processing.**  If the information on the enrollment certifications agrees with the information in WEAMS for the flight school or training center, adjudicators should combine the information on the enrollment certifications and enter one award.  The adjudicators must add the entries in the dual, ground, preflight briefings and post-flight critiques, and total charges fields on the 2 enrollment certifications.  The instrument course may not contain any solo flight training.  The adjudicator should use the solo hours on the enrollment certification for the commercial pilot certification course.  The adjudicator should use course code 341 to identify concurrent enrollments.

**EXAMPLE:**  A student enrolls concurrently in a commercial pilot certification course and an instrument rating course.  The flight school submits 2 enrollment certifications.  The enrollment certification for the commercial pilot certification course shows 55 hours of dual, 65 hours of solo, 35 hours of ground, 30 hours of preflight briefings and post-flight critiques, and total charges of $21,916.00.  The enrollment certification for the instrument rating course shows 35 hours of dual, 30 hours of ground, 8.75 hours of preflight briefings and post-flight critiques, and total charges of $7,529.50.  The information should be combined to show that the student is authorized to pursue 90 hours of dual flight training, 65 hours of solo flight training, 65 hours of ground training, and 38.75 hours of preflight briefings and post-flight critiques, with total charges not to exceed $29,445.50.

**d.  Monthly Certifications of Flight Training.**  The flight school or training center must submit monthly certifications for both courses if students completed training under both courses during the period.  The forms should be securely fastened together to expedite processing.  If a student only trained in one course during the period to be certified,  the school official should show in the Remarks section of the monthly certification that no training occurred in the other course during the period.  For example, if a student only trained in the commercial pilot certification course during a month, the school official should enter “No training in Instrument Rating Course” in the Remarks.

**e.  Monthly Certification Processing.**  Upon receipt of monthly certifications of flight training, the VCE (Veterans Claims Examiner) processing the forms must compare the information on the forms with the information in WEAMS for the flight school or training center.  If the information on the certifications agrees with the information in WEAMS, the VCE should combine the information on the forms and do one monthly certification transaction.

**f.  Chapter 30 PC (Personal Computer) Program.** The chapter 30 PC program is limited to 3 sets of hours and rates for dual, solo, ground, preflight briefings and post-flight critiques, and other training.  If a student completes training in both courses during the period being certified, it is possible that the monthly certifications will have more than 3 entries in one or more categories.  If that occurs, the VCE will need to enter 2 separate transactions.  The first step is to divide the period certified in half and enter the information from one certification in the first half of the period and the information for the second certification in the second half of the period.  Whenever this occurs, the VCE must send a dictated letter to the student explaining that he or she will receive 2 checks for training completed during the month.

**EXAMPLE:**  A student completes training in both courses during September.  The certification form for the commercial pilot certification course shows that the student completed dual training in 2 aircraft.  In the first aircraft, the student completed 3.3 hours at $81.50 per hour.  In the second aircraft, the student completed 2.1 hours at $105.25 per hour.  The certification form for the instrument rating course shows that the student completed dual training in 2 aircraft.  In the first aircraft, the student completed 1.6 hours at $86.50 per hour.  In the second aircraft, the student completed 1.1 hours at $110.75 per hour.  After checking the WEAMS record for approved aircraft and hourly rates, the employee should enter the information from the first certification using a beginning date of September 1st and an ending date of September 15th.  The information from the second certification should be entered using a beginning date of September 16th and an ending date of September 30th.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**4.16  VACERT FOR WINDOWS**

---

**a.  General.** A flight school or training center may use the Windows version of VACERT, the electronic education certification program, to generate VA Forms 22-1999-4 and 22-6553c-1.  The flight school or training center may electronically send enrollment certifications to the RPOs.  However, the monthly certification forms must be printed, signed by the student and the school’s certifying official, and mailed to the RPOs.

**b.  Registration Screen.**  The registration screen contains general information about a student including VA file number, name, Social Security number, address, type of training, and the name of the current program.  The information is used to complete the common fields on the enrollment certification and the monthly certification of flight training.

**c.  Enrollment Certification.** The fields for an enrollment certification for a vocational flight training course are on one screen.  System edits ensure that school officials complete the required fields.  The school’s certifying official has the option of printing the forms and mailing them to the RPOs or electronically transmitting them if the flight school or training center has a modem.  The information on the enrollment certification is used to complete the corresponding fields on the monthly certification form.

**d.  Monthly Certification of Flight Training.**  The monthly certifications require 2 screens.  The first screen contains general information while the second screen contains a detailed breakdown of the training conducted during the period being certified.  If the school official completes the enrollment certification, the fields for the name of the current course and the maximum number of dual, solo, preflight briefings and post-flight critiques, ground, and other hours are completed.  The program tracks the hours completed to date in the 5 categories of training and alerts the school official if a student exceeds the maximum hours.  The program compares the last entry in the total cost to the student field with the entry in the total charges field on the student’s enrollment certification and alerts the school official if the total cost to the student exceeds the total charges.  By doing the required calculations, the Windows version of VACERT can eliminate mathematical errors on the monthly certification forms.

**e.  The DOS (Disk Operating System) Version of VACERT.**  The DOS version of VACERT will not be revised to generate enrollment certifications and monthly certifications for flight training.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**SUBCHAPTER III.  SPECIFIC CRITERIA FOR JOB TRAINING ESTABLISHMENTS  
(See Policy Advisory dated October 18, 2005)**

**4.17  APPLICATIONS TO SAAs**

---

Businesses, JACs (Joint Apprenticeship Committees), JATCs (Joint Apprenticeship Training Committees), unions, and other establishments desiring approval of apprenticeships or other OJT (On-the-Job Training) programs must make applications in a manner prescribed by the SAA with jurisdiction of the area where the training is being provided or the records are maintained. Part 9: Chapter 2 - Review of Approvals - Overview  SAAs will develop application forms and procedures.  Appendix F contains the procedures for the ELR to function as the SAA for approval of apprenticeship and other OJT programs.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**4.18  APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS FOR APPRENTICESHIP AND OJT PROGRAMS**

---

**a.  Apprenticeship Programs.**  The requirements for approval of apprenticeship programs are shown below:

(1)  The Standards of Apprenticeship published by the Secretary of Labor in [29 U.S.C. 50a](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:29 section:50 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title29-section50)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) must be followed.

(2)  Signed copies of the agreements for VA trainees including, training programs and wage schedules as approved by the SAA, must be provided by employers to the trainees, VA, and the SAA.

(3)  Courses must meet other reasonable criteria established by the SAA but within the parameters of the following guidelines:

(i)  No additional criteria may have the effect of denying to VA trainees the benefits intended for them by law.

(ii)  The SAA cannot arbitrarily refuse to recognize entities as proper training establishments if employers, groups of employers, associations or organizations, JACs, or JATCs are able to carry out all the functions of training establishments and meet the published standards of the Secretary of Labor.

(iii)  The SAA cannot apply as additional criteria any administrative rules of the state that:

A.  Limit the number of approved sponsors in the same area and serving the same trade or craft.

B.  Require registration by the state or US DOL (Department of Labor).

C.  Require employers to be signatories to collective bargaining agreements.

D.  Require employers to be participating members of JACs or JATCs.

E.   Require that all training establishments agree to pay prevailing wage rates predicated on a journeyman scale established by agreement of some employers and unions.

(iv)  If the SAA belongs to a state apprenticeship council or other state agency, they must separate their state functions from their functions as the approving agency of programs for VA purposes.

(4)  Apprenticeship training programs must be approved when the criteria of the Federal law governing VA benefits for education and training and other reasonable criteria are met.  When state laws, rules, or regulations conflict with the Federal laws, the Federal law applies.

**b.  OJT Programs.**  The requirements for approval of OJT programs are shown below:

(1)  The job objectives must be ones in which progression and appointment to the next higher classification are based upon skills learned through organized training on the job, and not on other factors such as prior education or training, length of service, or normal turnover.

(2)  The training contents of the courses must be adequate to qualify VA trainees for appointments to the jobs that they are being trained for.

(3)  The jobs must customarily require a period of training of not less than 6 months and not more than 2 years of full time training.

(4)  The length of training periods must not be longer than that customarily required by other training establishments in the community that provide VA trainees with the required skills, and arrange for acquiring job knowledge, technical information, and other skills that VA trainees will need to learn in order to become competent in the job for which they are being trained.

(5)  Provision must be made for related instruction for VA trainees who may need it.

(6)  The establishments must have adequate space, equipment, instructional material, and qualified personnel to provide satisfactory training on the job.

(7)  Records must be kept to show the progress made by VA trainees toward their job objectives, and periodic reports must show the conduct and progress made in the course of training will be maintained.

(8)  VA trainees must not be already qualified by training or experience for the jobs.

(9)  Training establishments must certify that the wages to be paid to VA trainees upon entrance into training are not less than wages paid non-VA trainees in the same training positions, and are at least 50 percent of the wages paid for the job they are training for.  Additionally, provisions must be made for wages to increase in regular periodic increments until, not later than the last full month of scheduled training, they will be at least 85 percent of the wages paid for the jobs that VA trainees are being trained for.

*NOTE:  [Public Law 105-368](https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-105publ368/pdf/PLAW-105publ368.pdf) amended the trainee wage requirements effective October 1, 1998.  The requirement that wages must increase in regular periodic increments (or steps) until reaching 85 percent in the last full month of training does not apply to programs offered by Federal, state, and local governments.*

(10)  Establishments must certify that there is reasonable certainty that the jobs that VA trainees are training for will be available at the end of the training periods.

(11)  Signed copies of training agreements, including training programs and wage scales as approved by the SAA, must be provided by employers to trainees, to VA, and to the SAA.

(12)  Training courses must meet other reasonable criteria established by the SAA.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**4.19  DEFINITIONS - REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAMS**

---

**a.  Apprenticeable Occupations.**  Apprenticeable occupations are trades recognized by the US DOL BAT (Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training).  They require at least 2,000 hours of on the job experience as well as classroom instruction.  The BAT allows instruction through correspondence lessons when classroom instruction is not available.

**b.  JACs.**  JACs are committees composed of representatives of employers and employees represented by bona fide collective bargaining agents.  Their purpose is to conduct, operate or administer apprenticeship programs and enter into agreements with apprentices.

**c.  Registration.** Registration is the acceptance and recording of apprenticeship programs by the BAT or approval by recognized state apprenticeship agencies.  Programs must meet the basic standards and requirements of the BAT for approval.  Usually, the BAT or state agencies issue certificates of registration.

**d.  Related Instruction.** Related instruction is organized and systematic instruction.  The purpose is to provide apprentices with theoretical and technical subjects related to the trade.  It is usually classroom instruction either at schools or places of employment.  The BAT may approve correspondence lessons or a similar substitute when classroom instruction is not feasible.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**4.20  SPECIAL ISSUES - REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAMS**

---

**a.  General.** See Policy Advisory dated August 20, 2008.The SAA can usually approve registered apprenticeship programs.  In satisfying the requirements for registration, the BAT or state agencies may have already structured the programs, completed training agreements, established wage schedules, etc.  The SAA needs to address the issues in subparagraphs b through h below concerning VA requirements, if they exist.

**b.  Training Out of State.**  JACs, JATCs, or other apprenticeship committees may assign trainees to locations in other states.  The SAA with jurisdiction of the area where the JACs are located is responsible for approval of the programs.  JACs are responsible for completing all enrollment certifications and monthly certifications of hours worked.

**c.  Credit for Prior Training.** Apprenticeship programs may require trainees to request evaluations of previous training and experience.  However, certifying officials for approved apprenticeship programs must evaluate previous training and experience for all VA trainees without requests from the trainees.  When credit is granted, programs must be shortened proportionately.

**d.  Periods of Reduced Operations.**  VA may pay benefits to apprentices whom JACs retain during periods of reduced operations.  Apprentices must be training under layoff training plans that meet the BAT's requirements for such plans.

**e.  Unions.**  Apprenticeship programs do not have to be offered by unions for the SAA to approve them.

**f.  Temporary Deviations from Approved Wage Scales.**  The BAT may allow temporary deviations from approved wage scales.  For example, employers may find it necessary to stop increases in wages, i.e., freeze wages, due to temporary economic conditions.  As long as the BAT accepts the freeze, the programs will continue to meet VA approval criteria.

**g.  Length of Apprenticeship Programs.**  The SAA will approve apprenticeship programs for the same length as approved by the BAT, even if trainees may be able to complete the total hours in a shorter period.  For example, the BAT approves an apprenticeship program for 42 months or 6000 hours.  A trainee working 40 hours a week rather than 35 hours a week would complete the program in less than 36 months.  If the trainee receives the journeyman wage after 6000 hours, VA would terminate benefits on the date the trainee is promoted to the journeyman wage.

**h.  Payment of VA Benefits to Owners or Officers of Apprenticeship or OJT Programs.**  VA may not authorize benefits to trainees who are owners or officers of the establishments providing the training.  VA may not authorize benefits to trainees who are officers of apprenticeship committees that oversee the training.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**4.21  SPECIAL ISSUES - UNREGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAMS**

---

**a.  Registration Not Required.** See Policy Advisory dated August 20, 2008. The SAA and ELRs should not challenge employers’ decisions  not to seek BAT registration.  The programs, however, must be patterned after the training standards published by the BAT for those particular trades.

**b.  Approval Requirements.**  The SAA and ELRs must determine that the employer meets all the approval requirements as an apprenticeship.  That includes clear and concise training outlines, wage schedules, arrangements for related instruction, and training agreements.  The SAA and ELRs must also determine that the employer is capable of meeting the requirements in the training outline.

**c.  Certificate of Completion.** Employers must agree to award certificates of completion to trainees who complete the programs.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**4.22  SPECIAL ISSUES - OTHER OJT PROGRAMS**

---

**a.  Training Program Outline.**  See Policy Advisory dated August 20, 2008.A clear and concise training outline helps ensure the value of an OJT program and is a required approval criterion. The SAA will assist with the development of training outlines.  The SAA will use the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT) as well as the Occupational Informational Network (ONET) [(http://online.onetcenter.org/find/)](https://www.onetonline.org/find/)  when developing program outlines. (The ONET database has the most current information; the DOT has not been updated since 1991.)  The outlines must include statements showing: 

(1)  The skills the employers require trainees to learn for proper job performance.

(2)  The processes and techniques that employers teach trainees for the trainees to gain the necessary skills.  The SAA should require employers to explain these in short, descriptive statements.

(3)  The length of time trainees spend in each skill area.  Employers must give the number of hours for each.

(4)  Any related educational activities trainees should attend or complete.  If the employer does  not require related training, the statement must indicate that fact.

**b.  Related Instruction.** Provisions must exist for job related instruction, if trainees need it.

**c.  Length of Programs**

(1)  Jobs must customarily require at least 6 months of training but not more than 2 years of full-time (minimum of 30 hours per week) training.

(2)  The length of programs must not be longer than usually provided by other training establishments in the community.

(3)  The SAA will approve the first 6 to 24 months of longer programs, if trainees can obtain entry level positions within the first 6 to 24 months.  If a program is longer than 2 years and the SAA cannot identify entry level positions for lesser amounts of training, the SAA will not approve a part or parts of the program.

**d.  Significant Training.** The SAA will not approve jobs that require brief periods of experience to obtain and perform the jobs satisfactorily.  For example, automotive service station attendant, truck driver, food service worker, salesperson, window washer, janitor, unskilled laborer, and clerk, normally do not require significant training, i.e., at least 6 months of training.

**e.  Providing Copies of Training Agreements.**  Establishments must agree to give VA trainees signed copies of training agreements that include training program outlines and the wage schedules.

**f.  Adequate Records.** Establishments must agree to maintain adequate records of the progress made by all VA trainees.

**g.****SAA Identification of Jobs.**  The name of each program must identify the job that the trainee will have immediately upon completion of training.  For example, for a trainee who will initially work as an assistant manager before becoming a manager, the real objective of the program  is assistant manager rather than manager.

**h**.**  Supervisory and Managerial Programs.** The SAA will not approve a program for trainees unless it leads to an entry level position.  Supervisory positions are not normally entry level positions.  The SAA will examine each VA trainee's employment situation.  The SAA will determine that entry to the position is from a dissimilar occupation and is not a progression from a lower entry level.

**i.  OJT Normally Required for the Objective.**  The SAA will not approve a job training program for an objective when training is normally conducted at schools.  For example, a state may  require practical experience in accounting after the completion of a standard college degree to become a licensed certified public accountant.  The training in this example is orientation rather than training in basic skills.  The SAA will not approve work to gain experience in OJT programs because employees have already acquired the basic skills through academic instruction.

**j.  Jobs Requiring Licensing.** The SAA may approve a period of employment after completion of an academic program, if it is required for licensing and the employer closely supervises and reviews the employee's work.  The degree of supervision required by the state for licensing is one factor to consider when determining if there is a real training program.  If state law permits or requires structured, closely supervised training instead of, or along with, academic training, the SAA may approve the program.

**k.  Journeyman Wages.**  Employers are not required to pay journeyman wages upon completion of programs.  However, if an employer promises full journeyman wages and does not pay them, that employer may be engaging in deceptive advertising in violation of [38 U.S.C. 3696](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38 section:3696 edition:prelim) OR (granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3696)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true).  The SAA may require payment of the journeyman wages as an approval criterion.  VA strongly endorses a philosophy that trainees in OJT programs receive the journeyman wages immediately after completing the programs.  However, due to the wording of the law, VA cannot require it.

(1)  Although title 38 does not require payment of the journeyman wage rate, it must be established because the law does require payment of at least 50 percent of the wage rate at the beginning of the program and at least 85 percent of the wage rate during the last full month of training.

(2)  (See RPO Letter 22-06-12) VA benefits may not be authorized for periods after trainees receive journeyman wages.  There is a direct relationship between the wages received and the training status of employees.  Receipt of journeyman wages are evidence that trainees have reached the journeyman level, even though the employees continue training.  This includes all companies and industries, including police and fire departments.

*NOTE:  The requirement that wages must increase in regular periodic increments (or steps) until reaching 85 percent in the last full month of training does not apply to programs offered by Federal, state, and local governments effective October 1, 1998.*

**l.  Superficial Increases.**  Superficial increases in wages to meet approval requirements are not the intent of the law.  When Congress included OJT training in chapter 34 of title 38, US Code, it wanted to eliminate the abuses in job programs that occurred in previous GI bills.  Congress did not want VA education benefits to subsidize wages.  Chapters 30 and 32 of title 38, US Code and chapter 1606 of title 10, US Code continued these approval requirements.  Congress intended for wages to increase in regular increments to coincide with increases in job skills gained through training.  Employers must not base increases on factors such as cost of living or longevity.  Small increases along with one step increase before the journeyman wage, meet the letter of the law but not the spirit of the law.

**m.  Decreases in Wages.**  Wage decreases to meet approval requirements are not permissible.  The intent of the law is to provide financial assistance during periods when trainees are receiving reduced salaries while in training.  Trainees who are being paid at the journeyman wage rate, e.g., due to longevity or work performance in a different job, may not accept reductions in wages to qualify for VA benefits.

**n.  Commissions.** Sometimes employers base wages for either journeymen or trainees, in whole or in part, on commissions, fees, or other variables.  If the SAA cannot determine whether the wage requirements of the law are met, the program does not meet approval requirements.  VA trainees may not elect to receive a salary or a base salary instead of commissions to meet approval requirements, if such an election is not available to non-VA students.  When wages are a base salary plus commissions, the SAA will apply the principals described below for incentive pay.

**o.  Incentive Pay.**

(1)  Generally, wages based on job rates, commissions, piecework rates, or other variables prevent approval.  These types of payment make it impossible for training establishments to certify that the beginning wages are 50 percent of the journeyman wages, that there is at least one increment at least a month before trainees reach journeyman wages, and that the final increment is at least 85 percent of the journeyman wages.  However, the SAA may approve wage scales that consist of base wages and incentive pay if they meet the following conditions:

(i)  The trainee entrance base rate is at least 50 percent of the journeyman combined base and reasonable expected incentive rate.

(ii)  The trainee base rate is at least 85 percent of the journeyman combined base and reasonable expected incentive rate not later than the last full month of training.

(2)  VA may not pay benefits if the base rate equals or exceeds the journeyman base rate.  Employers must identify the journeyman and trainee base and reasonable expected incentive rates on training agreements.

*NOTE:  The requirement that wages must increase in regular periodic increments (or steps) until reaching 85 percent in the last full month of training does not apply to programs offered by Federal, state, and local governments effective October 1, 1998.*

**p.  Profit Sharing.** Participation in profit sharing is not a form of ownership.  Awarding cash or stock in a company as an incentive for high productivity is permissible and is not an integral part of the wages.

**q.  Deviations from the Approved Wage Scale.**  Employers may find it necessary to freeze wages for various reasons, e.g., temporary economic conditions, and the SAA may approve temporary deviations from the approved wage scale.  Due to the potential for serious abuse by employers, the SAA will fully document their approval of wage deviations and advise the ELRs of the changes.  If freezes or other deviations continue for indefinite periods, the SAA may determine that they should approve a change to lower wage scales.

**r.  Credit for Prior Training.** Employers must evaluate prior training and grant credit if appropriate.  If state laws, regulations, or union contracts prohibit wage increases based on credit for prior training, the programs do not meet approval requirements.

**s.  Rates of Payment with Credit for Prior Training and Reentrance into Training.**  When VA trainees receive credit for prior training or experience, the beginning rate of VA benefits is the rate for the initial 6 months of OJT, even if the amount of credit granted is 6 or more months.  However, when trainees change from one employer to another and continue training in the same objective, the monthly rate will be consistent with the length of training completed, e.g., a trainee who completed 6 months of training with the first employer, receives the second rate of payment for the second 6 month increment with the second employer.

**t.  Certification of Hours in Related Training.**  If trainees attend related training during normal work hours and receive pay, employers should certify the training hours as hours worked.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**GLOSSARY OF TERMS PERTAINING TO FLIGHT TRAINING**

---

**AIR AGENCY CERTIFICATE:**  An air agency certificate is issued by the FAA to flight schools that meet the requirements to offer courses of instruction leading to pilots’ licenses and ratings.  They are normally valid for 2 years.

**ATP (AIRLINE TRANSPORT PILOT):**  An airline transport pilot is the highest rating available for pilots.  This rating is required for pilots in command of turbojets with a passenger seating capacity of more than 10 and for any multiengine aircraft in commuter airline operations.  It is also required for pilots of helicopters engaged in interstate air transportation within the 48 states.  A pilot must have logged a minimum of 1,500 hours of flight time before enrolling in the course.

**CATEGORY RATING:**  A category rating is an authorization to pilot a category of flying machine such as aircraft (fixed wing powered airplanes), rotorcraft (helicopters), gliders, lighter than air ships (blimps, hot air balloons), etc.

**CFI (CERTIFIED FLIGHT INSTRUCTOR):**A certified flight instructor or CFI is a person who has taken the appropriate course and has been certified by the FAA to give flight instruction.  This also refers to the  course that pilots pursue to become a flight instructor.  The CFI course is broken down into 3 courses:

**CF**I-A (**CERTIFIED FLIGHT INSTRUCTOR - AIRPLANE):**  The holder can instruct students in piloting single engine aircraft.

**CFI-I (CERTIFIED FLIGHT INSTRUCTOR-INSTRUMENTS):**  The holder can instruct students in piloting aircraft while instrument flight rules are in effect.

**CFI-ME (CERTIFIED FLIGHT INSTRUCTOR-MULTI ENGINE):**  The holder can instruct students in piloting multiengine aircraft.

**CHIEF FLIGHT INSTRUCTOR:**  Each flight school must designate a flight instructor as the Chief Flight Instructor.  Schools approved under FAR Part 141 cannot offer flight training unless they have a Chief Flight Instructor, or temporarily in his or her absence, an Assistant Chief Flight Instructor.

**CLASS RATING:**  A class rating is an authorization to pilot a specific class of aircraft such as single engine land, single engine seaplane, multi engine land, multi engine seaplane, etc.

**COMMERCIAL PILOT CERTIFICATE:**  A commercial pilot certificate authorizes a pilot to carry persons or cargo for hire.  It is the basic license that may be approved for VA training.

**FAR (FEDERAL AIR REGULATIONS):**  The FARs contain the FAA regulations governing all aspects of flight training, air carrier operations, requirements for pilots, etc.

**FIXED WING:**  A fixed wing aircraft is any aircraft that has wings that are in a fixed position and are powered by propellers or jet engines affixed to the wings or fuselage.

**FSDO (FLIGHT STANDARDS DISTRICT OFFICE):**  The flight standards district offices are regionally located.  There are often one in a state.  There are more than one in larger populated states.  They are the FAA offices that approve flight schools under FAR Parts 141 and 142, accomplish safety inspections of flight schools and air carrier operations, etc.  They approve all curricula at flight schools under their jurisdiction and issue air agency certificates.

**IFR (INSTRUMENT FLIGHT RULES):**  Instrument flight rules are determined by FAA air traffic controllers.  The rules cover the time and the area of the sky of limited visibility when pilots must use navigational instruments to take-off, fly, and land the aircraft.  All aircraft maneuvers are dictated by FAA air traffic controllers on the ground by their radar and other flight guidance instruments.  A pilot is authorized to operate an aircraft while instrument flight rules are in effect only if the pilot has an instrument rating.

**INSTRUMENT RATING:**  An instrument rating is an addition to a commercial pilot certificate that authorizes a pilot to operate an aircraft during periods of low visibility when instrument flight rules are in effect.

**MEDICAL CERTIFICATE:**  A medical certificate is issued by the FAA based on a certification by a doctor upon completion of the appropriate medical exam.  All pilots must have a medical certificate to be authorized to fly.  Medical certificates come in 3 classes depending upon the extent of the physical exam:

**FIRST CLASS:**  The first class medical certificate is the highest level.  It is issued after the completion of a very strenuous physical exam.  It is required for all pilots to fly commercial aircraft under their ATP rating.  It is valid until the end of the sixth month after the physical exam.  At that time the pilot must retake the first class physical exam.  Otherwise, the first class medical certificate will revert to a second class medical certificate.

**SECOND CLASS:**  The second class medical certificate is required for pilots who are exercising the privileges of their Commercial Pilot’s license or who are providing flight instruction as a CFI.  It is based upon a somewhat less strenuous physical exam that must be retaken every year.  At the end of the twelfth month following the physical exam, a second class medical certificate reverts to a third class medical certificate.

**THIRD CLASS:**  The third class medical certificate is the basic physical exam required of all pilots to exercise the privilege of their Private Pilot’s License.  It is valid for 36 months after the physical exam for persons who have not reached their 40th birthday.  It is valid for 24 months for persons who have reached their 40th birthday.  After 36 or 24 months, it is invalid for any authorized flights.  This was a change from the previous rule and was effective for all medical certificates issued on or after September 16, 1996.

*Note:  It is important to remember that a First Class medical certificate is valid for first class privileges for 6 months after the physical exam.  Then it is valid for Second Class privileges for another 6 months (12 months after the physical exam).  Then it is valid for Third Class privileges for another 6 months (18 months after the physical exam).  A Second Class medical certificate is valid for Second Class privileges for 12 months after the physical exam.  Then it reverts to Third Class privileges for another 6 months.*

**PART 61:**  Part 61 is a section of the FARs that specifies the requirements for various pilots’ licenses and ratings.  Part 61 training cannot be approved for VA training because it relates to one on one instructor to student training without regard to a standard curriculum or school training.  A flight instructor can recommend a student for a license or rating based on that student passing a certain written test and successfully learning specific flight maneuvers.  It is the flight equivalent of tutorial assistance.

**PART 63:**  Part 63 is a section of the FARs that specifies the requirements for schools and courses to train flight engineers.  Part 63 courses may be approved for VA since it requires a school curriculum and standard course outline that must be followed.

**PART 141:**  Part 141 is a section of the FARs that specifies school requirements to train students for pilots’ licenses and ratings.  This training may be approved for VA because it specifically relates to school training and standard course outlines that must be followed.

**PART 142:**  Part 142 is a section of the FARs that specifies requirements to train students to fly specific, large-bodied aircraft (e.g., Boeing 737, DC-10, etc.) using large, complex simulators rather than actually flying the specific aircraft.  This is a major money saver since the rental fee for an aircraft like a Boeing 737 runs around $60 to $80 per minute.  A complex flight simulator may cost up to $500 or $800 per hour.

**PRIVATE PILOT CERTIFICATE:**  A private pilot certificate is the basic certificate that authorizes a person to operate an aircraft.  A person with a private pilot certificate cannot carry persons or cargo for hire.  Therefore, it is considered an avocational or recreational certificate.  VA education benefits cannot be paid for pursuit of a private pilot certificate.

**ROTARY WING  or ROTORCRAFT:**  An aircraft that is propelled and lifted by the action of the wings (rotors) such as a helicopter.

**STAGE CHECKS:**  The syllabus for each flight course is divided into sections called “stages.”  Each stage is divided into a number of “lessons” that correspond to a flight or ground training subject or maneuver to be completed.  After completing the last lesson in a stage, a test is given relating to all the material covered in the stage.  The test is commonly called a “stage check.”  Stage checks are commonly given during flights with the instructor telling the student to perform certain maneuvers or to navigate to particular points.  The ground school stage check is the written examination that each student must pass to complete the course.

**TYPE RATING:**  A type rating is an authorization to pilot a specific type of aircraft such as large aircraft (other than lighter than air, including Boeing 737, DC-10, L1011, etc.), small turbo jets (e.g., Lear Jet, Cessna Citation, etc.), small helicopters, etc.

**VFR (VISUAL FLIGHT RULES):**  Unless specified otherwise by FAA air traffic controllers, visual flight rules are the rules that pilots use to operate their aircraft based on what they can see, including all takeoffs and landings.  Unless the pilot has earned an instrument rating, he or she is authorized to fly an aircraft only when visual flight rules are in effect.

[Back to Top](##Top)

 

**VA APPROVAL OF FLIGHT SCHOOLS**

**1. RESPONSIBILITY**

---

**a.  SAA Actions.**  If the SAA declines to approve a flight school, a training center, or an air carrier, the ELR with jurisdiction over the area where the training is being offered will act as the SAA.  (See. Part 9: Chapter 5 - Programs Approved by Other Than State Approving Agencies for additional information on approval jurisdiction.)

**b.  Roles of ELRs and ECSSs**

(1)  If staffing permits, an ECSS (Education Compliance Survey Specialist) will do flight school approvals.  The ECSS will contact school officials and conduct the on site visits.  If the ECSS determines that the school and programs meet the approval requirements, he or she will prepare a memo to the ELR recommending approval of the school and programs.  If the ECSS determines that the school or programs do not meet the approval requirements, he or she will prepare a memo to the ELR.  The memo should explain the reason(s) why the school and programs should not be approved.

(2)  If staffing does not permit assigning an ECSS to do the approvals, the ELR will do them.  In these instances, the ELR must ensure that he or she carefully reviews all the facts regarding the application for approval of the school and the programs.  If the ELR determines that the school and programs meet the approval requirements, he or she will prepare a letter to the school official explaining the conditions for approval.  If the ELR determines that the school or programs do not meet the approval requirements, he or she will prepare a letter to the school official.  The letter should carefully explain the reason(s) why the school or programs could not be approved.

*NOTE:  CELOs may determine the most effective method of approving flight schools for the states in their jurisdiction when one or more SAA declines to approve flight schools or flight training centers.*

[Back to Top](##Top)

**2.  APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL**

---

**a.  Referrals from Other RO or RPO Divisions.** Other RO divisions may refer flight schools or training centers interested in obtaining approval of programs to the ELR.  The RPO divisions may receive applications from veterans or reservists for unapproved flight programs.  The divisions will send copies of applications and accompanying documents regarding the flight programs to the ELR of jurisdiction.

**b.  ELR/ECSS Actions**

(1)  Upon receipt of referrals from other RO or RPO divisions, the ELR or ECSS will contact the school official by telephone.  The ELR or ECSS will determine if the school official is operating a school with programs that could be approved.  The ELR or ECSS will also determine if the school official is willing to complete the necessary forms to have the programs approved for VA trainees.  If the school and programs could be approved, the ELR or ECSS will inform the school official that VA will send them an approval package to complete and return.

(2)  If time and budget permit, every effort will be made to schedule a visit to a school official who expresses an interest in becoming approved.  Priority in scheduling visits will be given to flight schools or training centers with veterans or reservists who have started training and submitted applications for education benefits.

**c.  Approval Packages**

(1)  Approval packages should contain a cover letter including the ELR’s or ECSS’s name and telephone number and locally developed applications, personal data sheets, and financial statements.   The ELR or ECSS should include VA Forms 22-1919, Conflicting Interest Certification, 22-8794, Designation of Certifying Official(s), and 27-8206, Statement of Assurance of Compliance with Equal Opportunity Laws.  The ELR or ECSS should include a preaddressed business reply envelope to expedite the return of the completed package.

(2)  The ELR or ECSS should review completed approval packages received from school officials to determine if the school and programs meet the approval requirements.  The ELR or ECSS should pay particular attention to the school’s catalog to determine if it meets the requirements in [38 CFR 21.4254](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=2d9f984fd543e88c7c9be4ee20942c98&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14254).  The ELR or ECSS should ensure that the package includes a Training Course Outline and syllabus for each course for which the school is requesting approval.  If there are omissions or additional information is needed before the determination can be made, the ELR or ECSS should contact the school official by telephone to request the information.  The ELR or ECSS should make every effort to complete the review of the approval package before scheduling a visit to the school or training center.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**3.  INSPECTION VISITS**

---

**a.  Purpose.** Inspection visits should:

(1)  Verify that the school or training center has been offering advanced training for 2 years;

(2)  Verify that the school or training center has all the required Federal, State, and local government licenses;

(3)  Verify that the school has the aircraft, simulators, and flight training devices contained in the application;

(4)  For training centers, verify that the center has made the necessary arrangements for simulators and aircraft;

(5)  Verify the school or training center’s refund policy;

(6)  Inspect the school or training center’s training records to determine if they meet VA requirements;

(7)  Verify that the school or training center’s records are adequate for computing the 85-15% ratio requirement;

(8)  Determine the effective date of approval;

(9)  Determine the maximum number of trainees the flight school or training center can train at any one time based upon the number of instructors, aircraft, simulators, flight training devices, and classroom space;

(10)  Inspect the training site(s);

(11)  Inspect the school or training center’s advertising;

(12)  Explain how to complete VA Forms 22-1999, Enrollment Certification, and 22-6553c, Monthly Certification of Flight Training;

(13)  Explain that the school or training center may use VACERT to generate enrollment certifications and the  monthly certifications of flight training;

(14)  Explain VA requirements for maintaining copies of licenses and medical certificates;

(15)  Explain the payment of education benefits to VA trainees.

(16)  Resolve any approval issues; and

(17)  Provide an opportunity for the ELR or ECSS to explain the obligation of school officials to provide training, maintain records, and promptly notify VA of changes in the programs.

**b.  Reports**.  Following each inspection visit, a report will be prepared addressing all the items covered during the visit.  To make it easier for the ELR or ECSS to conduct future compliance surveys or other visits to the flight school or training center, the report will include accurate directions.  If the ELR or ECSS obtained copies of the forms used by the school or training center, attach the forms to the report.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**4.  NOTICES OF APPROVAL**

---

If it is determined that the flight school or training center and the programs meet the approval requirements, a letter will be prepared notifying the school officials of the approval and the effective date.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**5.  DENIALS OF APPROVAL**

---

If the flight school or training center or the programs do not meet the approval requirements, the ELR will prepare a letter notifying the school officials of the denial of the request for approval and the reason(s).  The letter must include the statutory and regulatory requirements that the school or training center and the programs must meet to qualify for approval.  The letter should inform the school officials that, if they disagree with the decision, they may request an administrative review by to the Director, Education Service.  Requests for administrative reviews must be sent to the VA office that disallowed the original application.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**6.  SUSPENSIONS AND WITHDRAWALS OF APPROVALS**

---

**a.  Requests from School Officials.** The ELR may suspend or withdraw approvals of a flight school or training center and the programs if a school official requests the withdrawal, there are no VA trainees, or the flight school or training center ceases to exist or moves to a new location outside the jurisdiction of the ELR.  If a school official calls the ELR and requests the withdrawal, the ELR should complete a VA Form 119, Report of Contact, to file in the approval folder.  It is not necessary to send the school official a letter. 

**b.  Adverse Actions**

(1)  The approval may be suspended or withdrawn as the result of a compliance survey or other VA visit that shows that the school is not meeting the approval requirements.  The procedures in [38 CFR 21.4210](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=2d9f984fd543e88c7c9be4ee20942c98&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14210) involving currently enrolled VA students and enrollments of new VA students must be carefully followed.  (See Part 1: Chapter 8 - Other Actions Due to School Noncompliance for additional information.)

(2)  Before sending letters to students or school officials, the ELR should send the approval and compliance survey files and proposed letters to the CELO to review.  If the CELO agrees with the decision, the package should be sent to the RPO Director for a decision.

(3)  The letter to the school official(s) should inform them that they may request a hearing before the RPO’s CEA (Committee on Educational Allowances).  A copy of the CEA hearing rules should be enclosed with the letter.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**7.  RECORDS**

---

Approval folders may be established for approved, denied, or pending flight schools or training centers in Salesforce.  Records for schools that were never approved will not be entered in WEAMS.  (For additional information, see Part 9: Chapter 6 - Maintaining Approval Records in WEAMS and Chapter 8 Records, Files, and Reports.) 

 

****FAA MINIMUM AND VA MAXIMUM LENGTHS FOR FLIGHT COURSES****

|  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **COURSE** | **DUAL** | **SOLO** | **GROUND** | **PREFLIGHT/** |
| **Part 141 (Appendix)** | **HOURS** | **HOURS** | **SCHOOL** | **POST-FLIGHT** |
| Initial Instrument Rating | 35 |  | 30 | 8.75 |
| (App. C)     120% | 42 |  |  | 10.5 |
|  |  |  |  |  |
| Additional Instrument Rating | 15 |  | 20 | 3.75 |
| (App. C)     120% | 18 |  |  | 4.5 |
|  |  |  |  |  |
| Commercial Pilot Certification |  |  |  |  |
| Airplane & Powered-Lift | 55 | 65 | 35 | 30 |
| (App. D)     120% | 66 |  |  | 32.75 |
|  |  |  |  |  |
| Commercial Pilot Certification | 30 | 85 | 30 | 28.75 |
| Rotorcraft     (App. D)     120% | 36 |  |  | 30.25 |
|  |  |  |  |  |
| Commercial Pilot Certification | 4 | 2 | 20 | 1.5 |
| Glider     (App. D)     120% | 4.8 |  |  | 1.7 |
|  |  |  |  |  |
| Commercial Pilot Certification | 55 | 100 | 65 | 38.75 |
| Lighter-than-Air with an |  |  |  |  |
| Airship Rating  (App. D)  120% | 66 |  |  | 41.5 |
|  |  |  |  |  |
| Commercial Pilot Certification | 10 |  | 20 | 2.5 |
| Lighter-than-Air with a Balloon |  |  |  |  |
| Class Rating  (App. D)  120% | 12 |  |  | 3 |
|  |  |  |  |  |
| Initial Flight Instructor |  |  |  |  |
| Certification – Airplane, | 25 |  | 40 | 6.25 |
| Rotorcraft, or Powered-Lift |  |  |  |  |
| (App. F)     120% | 30 |  |  | 7.5 |
|  |  |  |  |  |
| Additional Flight Instructor |  |  |  |  |
| Certification – Airplane, | 25 |  | 20 | 6.25 |
| Rotorcraft, or Powered-Lift |  |  |  |  |
| (App. F)     120% | 30 |  |  | 7.5 |
|  |  |  |  |  |
| Initial Flight Instructor – Glider | 10 |  | 40 | 2.5 |
| (App. F)     120% | 12 |  |  | 3 |
|  |  |  |  |  |
| Additional Flight Instructor | 10 |  | 20 | 2.5 |
| Glider     (App. F)     120% | 12 |  |  | 3 |
|  |  |  |  |  |
| Flight Instructor Instrument | 15 |  | 15 | 3.75 |
| (App. G)     120% | 18 |  |  | 4.5 |
|  |  |  |  |  |
| Initial Ground Instructor |  |  |  |  |
| (App. H)     120% |  |  | 20 |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
| Additional Ground Instructor |  |  |  |  |
| (App. H)     120% |  |  | 10 |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
| Additional Aircraft  Category or Class Rating   (App. I) | Each approved course for an additional aircraft category rating or additional aircraft class rating must include the flight training time requirements and flight training on the areas of operation that are specific to that aircraft category and class rating and pilot certificate level for which the course applies. | | | |
| Additional Type Rating |  |  |  |  |
| For Other Than an Airline | 10 |  | 10 | 2.5 |
| Transport Pilot Certificate |  |  |  |  |
| (App. J)     120% | 12 |  |  | 3 |
|  |  |  |  |  |
| Agricultural Aircraft Operations | 15 |  | 25 | 3.75 |
| (App. K, par. 6)     120% | 18 |  |  | 4.5 |
|  |  |  |  |  |
| Airline Transport Pilot | 25 |  | 40 | 6.25 |
| (App. E)     120% | 30 |  |  | 7.5 |
|  |  |  |  |  |

[Back to top](##Top)

**EXAMPLES OF COURSE APPROVAL ISSUES**

**EXAMPLE 1:**  The SAA approves a commercial pilot certificate course with 75 hours of dual flight training, 45 hours of solo flight training, 35 hours of ground school, and 30 hours of preflight briefings and post-flight critiques.  The FSDO-approved TCO and syllabus show the minimum requirements of 55 hours of dual flight training, 65 hours of solo flight training, and 35 hours of ground school.

**DISCUSSION:**  The ELR should not accept the approval because the hours approved by the SAA exceed or are equal to those in the FSDO-approved TCO and syllabus.

**EXAMPLE 2:**  The SAA approves an instrument course for 42 hours of dual flight training, 36 hours of ground school, and 10.5 hours of preflight briefings and post-flight critiques.  The FSDO-approved TCO and syllabus show 40 hours of dual flight training and 35 hours of ground school.

**DISCUSSION:**  The ELR should return the approval to the SAA to correct.  Since the FSDO approved the actual length of the course offered by the school, the SAA cannot approve more hours than those shown on the TCO and syllabus.  The approval should be for 40 hours of dual flight training, 35 hours of ground school, and 10 hours of preflight briefings and post-flight critiques.

**EXAMPLE 3:**  The ELR, acting as the SAA, receives a request for approval of a commercial pilot course for a rotorcraft.  The flight school requests approval of 60 hours of dual flight training, 55 hours of solo flight training, 30 hours of ground school, and 28 hours of preflight briefings and post-flight critiques.  The FSDO-approved TCO and syllabus agree with the hours for flight training and ground school requested by the flight school.

**DISCUSSION:**  The ELR should approve the request.  The total of 115 hours of flight training meets the FAA’s minimum requirement.  The 30 hours of ground training is the FAA’s recommendation.  Although the TCO and  syllabus do not contain the hours of preflight briefings and post-flight critiques, the school’s request for 28 hours is less than the maximum of 28.75 hours for 115 hours of flight training.

**EXAMPLE 4:**  The ELR receives an approval from the SAA for a 737 type rating course offered by a flight training center operating under part 142.  The approval is for 15 hours of simulator training, 1 hour of flight training in the aircraft, 50 hours of ground school, and 4 hours of preflight briefings and post-flight critiques.  The training specification document supports the number of hours requested.

**DISCUSSION:**  The ELR should accept the approval.  Since the training center is operating under part 142, the course does not have to meet the minimum and maximum hours contained in part 141.  Since simulator training is classified as flight training, the hours of preflight briefings and post-flight critiques are acceptable.

 

[Back to Top](##Top)

---

**MAXIMUM HOURS FOR FLIGHT SIMULATORS AND FLIGHT TRAINING DEVICES PART 141  VS. PART 142**

|  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | **FLIGHT** | **FLIGHT** | **FLIGHT** | **TOTAL** |
| **COURSE** | **TRAINING** | **SIMULATOR** | **TRAINING DEVICE** | **SIMULATOR**     **& DEVICE** |
|  |  |  |  |  |
| Instrument Rating |  |  |  |  |
| Part 141 | 35 | 17.5 | 14 | 17.5 |
| Part 142 | 35 |  |  | 30 |
|  |  |  |  |  |
| Commercial Pilot |  |  |  |  |
| Airplane & Powered-Lift |  |  |  |  |
| Part 141 | 120 | 36 | 24 | 36 |
| Part 142 | 120 |  |  | 100 |
|  |  |  |  |  |

  

[Back to Top](##Top)

**VA APPROVAL OF APPRENTICESHIP AND OTHER OJT PROGRAMS**

**1. RESPONSIBILITY**

---

**a.  SAA Actions.** If the SAA declines to approve registered or unregistered apprenticeships or OJT programs, the ELR with jurisdiction over the area where the training is being offered will act as the SAA.  (See Part 9: Chapter 5 - Programs Approved by Other Than State Approving Agencies for additional information on approval jurisdiction.)

**b.  Roles of ELRs and the ECSS**

(1)  If staffing permits, an ECSS will do apprenticeship and OJT approvals.  The ECSS will make the initial contacts with establishments and conduct the on site visits.  If the ECSS determines that the establishment and the programs meet the approval requirements, he or she will prepare a memo to the ELR recommending approval.  If the ECSS determines that the establishment or the programs do not meet the approval requirements, he or she will prepare a memo to the ELR.  The memo will explain the reason(s) why the establishment and the program(s) should not be approved.

(2)  If staffing does not permit assigning an ECSS to do approvals, the ELR will do them.  In these instances, the ELR must ensure that he or she carefully reviews all the facts regarding applications for approval of establishments and programs.  If the ELR determines that the establishment and the programs meet the approval requirements, he or she will prepare a letter to the establishment explaining the conditions for approval.  If the ELR determines that the establishment or the programs do not meet the approval requirements, he or she will prepare a letter to the establishment.  The letter will carefully explain the reason(s) why the establishment or program(s) could not be approved.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**2.  APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL**

---

**a.  Referrals from Other RO or RPO Divisions.**  Other RO divisions may refer establishments interested in obtaining approval of apprenticeship or OJT programs to the ELR.  The RPO’s divisions may receive applications from veterans, reservists, or eligible persons for unapproved programs.  The divisions will send copies of applications and accompanying documents regarding the training programs to the ELR of jurisdiction.

**b.  ELR/ECSS Actions**

(1)  Upon receipt of a referral from RO or RPO divisions, the ELR or ECSS will contact the establishment by telephone.  The ELR or ECSS will try to determine if the officials at the establishment are offering a training program that could be approved.  The ELR or ECSS will also try to determine if the officials at the establishment are willing to complete the necessary forms to have the program approved for VA trainees.  If the program could be approved, the ELR or ECSS will inform the establishment that VA will send them an approval package to complete and return.

(2)  If time and budget permit, every effort will be made to schedule a visit to an establishment that expresses an interest in becoming approved.  Priority in scheduling visits will be given to establishments with veterans, reservists, or eligible persons who have started training and submitted applications for education benefits.

**c.  Approval Packages.**

(1)  The approval package should contain a cover letter including the ELR’s or ECSS’s name and telephone number, VA Forms 22-8597, Fact Sheet for OJT Programs, (for establishments seeking approval of OJT programs), 22-8864, Other On-the-Job Training and Apprenticeship Training Agreement and Standards, and 22-8865, Employer's Application to Provide Job Training.  For establishments seeking approvals of OJT programs, include VA Form 27-8206, Statement of Assurance of Compliance with Equal Opportunity Laws.  The ELR or ECSS should include a preaddressed business reply envelope to expedite the return of the completed package.

(2)  The ELR or ECSS will review each completed approval package received from an establishment to determine if the program meets the approval requirements.  If additional information is needed before the determination can be made, the ELR or ECSS should contact the establishment by telephone to request the information.  Every effort should be made to complete the review of the approval package before scheduling a visit to the establishment.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**3.  INSPECTION VISITS**

---

**a.  Purpose**.  Inspection visits should:

(1)  Provide opportunities for the ELR or ECSS to explain the obligation of establishments to provide training, maintain records, and promptly notify VA of changes in the programs;

(2)  Resolve any approval issues;

(3)  Inspect the training site(s);

(4)  Determine the maximum number of trainees the establishment can train at any one time;

(5)  Determine the effective dates of approval;

(6)  Explain how to complete VA Forms 22-1999, Enrollment Certification, and 22-6553d, Monthly Certification of On-the-Job and Apprenticeship Training; and

(7)  Explain the payment of education benefits to VA trainees.

**b.  Reports.**  Following each inspection visit, prepare a report addressing all the items covered during the visits.  To make it easier for the ELR or ECSS to conduct future compliance surveys or other visits to the establishment, each report will include accurate directions.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**4.  NOTICES OF APPROVAL**

---

If it is determined that the establishment and the programs meet all the approval requirements, prepare a letter notifying the establishment of the approval and the effective date.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**5.  DENIALS OF APPROVAL**

---

If it is determined that the establishment or the programs do not meet all the approval requirements, prepare a letter notifying the establishment of the denial of the request for approval and the reason(s).  The letter must include the statutory and regulatory requirements the establishment must meet to qualify for approval.  The letter should inform the establishment officials that, if they disagree with the decision, they may request an administrative review by the Director, Education Service.  Requests for administrative reviews must be sent to the VA office that disallowed the application.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**6.  SUSPENSIONS AND WITHDRAWALS OF APPROVALS**

---

**a.  Requests from School Officials.**  The ELR may suspend or withdraw the approval of a job training establishment and the programs if an official of the training establishment requests the withdrawal, there are no VA trainees, or the training establishment ceases to exist or moves to a new location outside the jurisdiction of the ELR.  If an official of a training establishment calls the ELR and requests the withdrawal, the ELR should complete a VA Form 119 to file in the approval folder.  It is not necessary to send the training establishment official a letter. 

**b.  Adverse Actions**

(1)  The approval may be suspended or withdrawn as the result of a compliance survey or other VA visit that shows that the school is not meeting the approval requirements.  The procedures in [38 CFR 21.4210](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=2d9f984fd543e88c7c9be4ee20942c98&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14210) involving currently enrolled VA trainees and enrollments of new VA trainees must be carefully followed.  (See Part 1: Chapter 8 - Other Actions Due to School Noncompliance for additional information.)

(2)  Before sending letters to trainees or training establishment officials, the ELR should send the approval and compliance survey files and proposed letters to the CELO for review.  If the CELO agrees with the decision, the package should be sent to the RPO Director for a decision.

(3)  The letter to the training establishment official(s) should inform them that they may request a hearing before the RPO’s CEA.  A copy of the CEA hearing rules should be enclosed with the letter.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**7.  RECORDS**

---

Apprenticeship and OJT Approval records may be established for approved, denied, or pending approval programs within Salesforce. Records for training establishments that were never approved will not be entered in WEAMS.  (For additional information, see Part 9: Chapter 6 – ‘Approval information in WEAMS’ and Chapter 8 ‘Records, Files, and Reports’.)

[Back to Top](##Top)