# Chapter 1. Post-9-11 Educational Assistance Program

## **Post-9/11 GI Bill**

**Chapter 1. Post-9/11 Educational Assistance Program**

The Post-9/11 GI Bill provides financial support to service members, veterans, and eligible dependents who attend education or training programs taken at accredited colleges or universities and at accredited schools or programs that do not grant college degrees (non-college degree or NCD programs). To be eligible, individuals must have either of the following:

* At least 90 days of total service on or after September 11, 2001; or
* A military discharge and a service-connected disability after 30 days of service.

**a. The individual must have received an honorable discharge to be eligible for the Post-9/11 GI Bill.**

The Post-9/11 GI Bill will pay eligible individuals:

* Up to 100% tuition and fee coverage
* A monthly living allowance (housing allowance)
* Up to $1,000 per academic year for books and supplies
* A one-time rural benefit payment  (relocation allowance) for eligible individuals
* The option to transfer entitlement to eligible dependents
* License or certification test reimbursement, work-study programs, and $100 a month for tutorial assistance

The Post-9/11 GI Bill provides up to 36 months of entitlement for education benefits. Generally, benefits are payable for 15 years after the latest release from active duty.

Post-9/11 benefit payments are based on the number of days of qualifying active-duty service a service member or veteran has on or after September 11, 2001. See Qualifying Post-9/11 Service Table

The following table offers a quick overview of the Post-9/11 GI Bill benefits for each major group of recipients who meet the basic eligibility qualifications. Learn more about [eligibity requirements](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073730/Chapter-2-Eligibility).

 

| **If**   **You  Are:** | **You Qualify**  **for:** | **Tuition and Fees** | **Monthly Housing Stipend** | **Books and Supplies Stipend** | **Ability to Transfer Benefits** | **Yellow Ribbon Program** | **Relocation Allowance** | **Licensing and Certification Exams** |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **On Active Duty** | |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **A Guard or Selected Reserve Member** | |  | NOTE 1 |  |  |  |  |  |
| **A Veteran** | |  | NOTE 1 |  | NOTE 2 |  |  |  |

NOTE 1: All students on active duty and those pursuing training at half-time  or less are not eligible for the Housing Stipend. 

NOTE 2: A service member may only choose to transfer benefits while still serving in the military.

**Sources**

Electronic Code of Federal Regulations [§ 21.9550 Entitlement](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_19550).

Electronic Code of Federal Regulations [§ 21.9590 Approved Programs of Education and Courses](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=5f6d7adbb6a68e4712625f2c90e8610b&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_19590).

[PL 110-252](https://www.congress.gov/110/plaws/publ252/PLAW-110publ252.pdf), Chapter 33 Post-9/11 Educational Assistance, Subchapter II Educational Assistance, Section 3313. Educational Assistance: Amount; Payment

**Last updated:** Monday, October 5, 2015