# Chapter 8 - Records

**Part 10: Chapter 8 - Records**

[8.01  Compliance Survey File](#801)

[8.02  Retention of Compliance Survey Records](#802)

[8.03  WEAMS](#8.03 WEAMS)  
 

**8.01 COMPLIANCE SURVEY FILE**

---

**a**.  Compliance survey files are electronic as of 2018 and are maintained in Salesforce. Survey Files will contain all required documents and correspondence pertaining to the accomplishment of compliance surveys conducted at ETIs. Records will be uploaded using the name format FYXX-Fac\_Code-Document Name.

**b**. Communications.All emails should be sent through Salesforce. This includes the initial contact email, any initial development emails and the findings letter. An initial development email is the first time the ETI is emailed a question or request for additional documents. Subsequent emails on the same topic may be sent through other email applications such as Outlook but must be captured in the survey file at the end of the survey.

**c.**  Copies of all compliance survey referrals including the email used to send them along with the referral response including the email received, must be included with the survey file in Salesforce. There are two options to capture referrals:

1. If referrals were sent using the Salesforce email function, surveyors must capture the email and referral response within a single PDF document that lists each beneficiary in alphabetical order; label document as: FYXX-Fac Code-Referrals; Upload PDF document to Salesforce.
2. If referrals were sent using a non-Salesforce email application (i.e. Outlook, SAA State account, etc.), surveyors must capture within a single PDF document the following communications:

* A copy of the referral and email sent (i.e. processing, SAA, etc.)
* Referral response including the email received
* Create a PDF document with beneficiaries listed in alphabetical order
* Save PDF using format: FYXX-Fac Code-Referrals
* Upload PDF to Salesforce

**Note**: Surveyors are not required to complete a hard copy 22-1934.  The Salesforce 22-1934 is the official compliance survey copy.  If an additional 22-1934 is uploaded to the Salesforce compliance survey file and not marked as a “working copy” that has errors, those errors may be cited on a quality review.

**8.02 RETENTION OF COMPLIANCE SURVEY RECORDS**

---

**a**. Retain the compliance survey records for each facility as long as any irregularities or discrepancies remain unresolved. This includes compliance surveys which would have resulted in a determination that a substantial pattern of overpayments exists, except that this was the first occurrence and the school or training establishment had not been previously notified in writing (see par. 5.02[**)**](https://vbaw.vba.va.gov/bl/22/ref/m22-4/Part%20X/ch05.htm#502). In these cases, the survey report and letter to the facility will be retained permanently, unless the school's approval has been withdrawn. If the school's approval has been withdrawn, see [**subparagraph b.**](#802b) below.

**b.** Once all irregularities or discrepancies have been resolved, retain the compliance survey records for 7 calendar years after the date of the survey, unless the school's approval has been withdrawn. If the school's approval has been withdrawn, survey reports may be destroyed 3 calendar years after the date of the survey. Records will be destroyed following the above periods in accordance with RCS VB-1, Part I, Item Number 7 662.030. Obsolete materials should be disposed of as they are encountered during normal operations. However, it may be necessary to periodically purge files which have not been active for a long time.

**NOTE:** *Student transcripts and other confidential materials must be destroyed*

 **c.** Uploading Hard Copy Compliance files to Salesforce

1. Hard copy compliance survey files less then 7 calendar years old may be scanned and uploaded to Salesforce.
2. Hard copy records may be scanned in any logical format and labeled as FYXX-Fac\_Code-file name (the file name may be, Student Records, 22-1934, etc).
   1. Once all records are scanned, individual files must be added to a ZIP file and labeled as FYXX-Fac Code-Compliance Survey.
      * To create a ZIP file, all the files must be in the same folder, highlight all the files to be included in the ZIP folder, right click and hover the mouse over: Send To”, click on option the says “Compressed ZIP Folder.  Then follow the on-screen instructions.
   2. Compliance surveys must uploaded to the main facility record (the one with heart icon) under the Related tab, Files section.  Once the Files section has been located, upload the file.
3. Once the ZIP file has been uploaded to Salesforce, disposed of the hard copy records by following local procedures.

 

---

**8.03 WEAMS**

As of 10/01/2018, all Compliance Survey activity is entered into Salesforce. WEAMS compliance survey data entry is no longer required.  Existing entries are maintained for historical purposes only.