# ARCHIVED: M22-4, Part II, Chapter 1 - Computer Processing Concepts

**ARCHIVED August 14, 2025** 

**FOR HISTORICAL PURPOSES ONLY** 

**Part 2: Chapter 1 - Computer Processing Concepts**

 

**[Subchapter 1.](#SI) BDN Processing**  
[1.01 General](#101)  
[1.02 BDN](#102)  
[1.03 BDN Payment Systems](#103)  
[1.04 BDN Award Types](#104)  
[1.05 BDN Data Entry](#105)  
[1.06 [Reserved for Future Use]](#106)  
[1.07 [Reserved for Future Use]](#107)  
  
**[Subchapter 2](#SII). BDN Master Records**  
[1.08 Education Master Records - General](#108)  
[1.09 Education Master Records - Chapter 30](#109)  
[1.10 Education Master Records - Chapter 32](#110)  
[1.11 Education Master Records - Chapters 34 and 35](#111)  
[1.12 Education Master Records - Chapter 1606](#112)  
[1.13 Schedule of Operation](#113)  
  
**[Subchapter 3.](#SIII) Non-BDN Applications and Processing**  
[1.14 Non-BDN Payment Systems](#114)  
[1.15 Veterans Education Certification Program](#115)  
[1.16 Electronic Certification Automated Processing](#116)  
[1.17 Web Based Applications](#117)  
[1.18 Telephone Applications](#118)  
[1.19 The Imaging Management System](#119)  
[1.20 Other Supporting Applications](#120)  
  
**Figures**  
[1.01 Chapter 30 Schedule of Operation](#f101)  
[1.02 Chapter 32 Schedule of Operation](#f102)  
[1.03 Chapter 34/35 Schedule of Operation](#f103)  
[1.04 Chapter 1606 Schedule of Operation](#f104)  
 

**SUBCHAPTER I.  BDN PROCESSING**

[NOTE: It is essential to immediately report any instance of apparent BDN (Benefits Delivery Network) misprocessing to the Education Service's Systems Staff (225D) by e-mail to "[VAVBAWAS/CO/225D](mailto:VAVBAWAS/CO/225D?subject=Part%202%3A%20Chapter%201%20-%20Computer%20Processing%20Concepts)" or by calling (202) 273-7181].

**1.01  GENERAL**

---

 **a.  Key Terms**. 

(1)  Application.  The term "application" is used synonymously with a computer program or software.  Microsoft Word and the chapter 1606 system are both applications.

(2)  Award Actions.  Certain BDN transactions that result in creation or change to award lines in BDN master records.  Award lines are necessary to have recurring monthly payments.

*NOTE:  This chapter and the subsequent chapters in this part assume the employee knows how to log on to BDN).*

(3)  BDN.  BDN stands for Benefits Delivery Network.  BDN was formerly known as Target.  For over 25 years, BDN has been VA’s primary benefit award processing and payment system.

(4)  BDN Commands.  Four-character acronyms, e.g., MINQ, BINQ, CADJ, used on the BDN ready screen to begin various processes (such as inquiry or update of records).   These procedures refer to the various BDN commands where appropriate. 

(5)  BDN screens.  BDN screens show data in BDN records and permit data entry for updating BDN.

(6)  Database.  A database is a set of data elements that have specifically defined lengths, formats, and meanings and are related to each other by a common usage or need.  After the data elements have been defined, they can be used to store the same information for multiple entities.  Currently, in BDN, all education benefits (chapter 30, chapter 32, chapter 25, and chapter 1606) have separate databases.

(7)  Data Element.  A data element is sometimes called a database field.  For example, Date of Birth, would be a data element that is used to define a person.  The element would be defined by its length (BDN uses a standard date length of 7 characters) and format (a defined date format, such as MMDDYY).  Most databases have one field that is used for sorting data.  In BDN, this field is the file number.  This allows you to enter the file number of a person on a screen and see data that pertains to that person.  The data on the screen is pulled from the database and formatted on the screen.

(8)  Fiscal Actions.  Certain BDN transactions that create a one-time payment or debt (accounts receivable).

(9)  Mainframe.  The mainframe is a large centrally located computer capable of processing thousands of transactions per second from hundreds of different sources.

(10)  Master Record.  In BDN, a master record is the benefit record of a claimant.  It is all the information that exists on the claimant in the database. 

(11)  Network.  A network is a group of computers linked together that allow the sharing of resources, such as printers, hard disks, and software applications.  For example, BDN is a mainframe network - it provides access to data from several different locations.  Your office has one or more servers that link together your desktop PCs.  These local networks are “client-server” networks.

(12)  PIF (Pending Issue File).  The PIF is a database which used as a “temporary” data storage area in which pending data is stored.  When you process an award, the data for the new award is stored in the PIF until it is authorized, at which point it is stored in the master record.

(13)  Server.  The server is a computer that links together several desktop computers into a network. 

(14)  Software.  Software is a computer program or application.

(15)  Transaction Codes.  A two- or three-digit code which tells BDN how to process a particular set of data.  BDN can be updated only through transactions.  See chapter 2 for more information.

**b.  Education Processing**.  Most education processing is done through BDN which is described in [paragraphs 1.02 through 1.13](#102).  BDN is maintained at the BDC (Benefits Delivery Center) in Hines, Illinois.  Some payments are made through non-BDN systems as described in [paragraph 1.14.](#114) In addition, there are a number of non-BDN applications now in use which enhance education processing.  These are described in [paragraphs 1.15 though 1.20.](#115)  The four BDN education systems are: 

(1)  The chapter 30 system;

(2)  The chapter 32 system (which also includes Section 903 processing);

(3)  The chapter 34/35 system;

(4)  The chapter 1606 system.

**c.  BDN Education Master Records**.  [Part 2: Chapter 3 - Master Record Inquiry (Overview and [Chs. 32, 34, 35 and Secs. 901, AND 903])](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000075787?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) and [Part 2: Chapter 4 - Master Record Inquiry (Chapter 30)](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000077340?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) of this part provide detailed descriptions of the master record screens for chapters 30, 32, and 35.  TG (Training Guide) 22-99-5, The Chapter 1606 User Guide, describes master records screens for chapter 1606.  [Part 02, Computer Processing. Chapter 6 - BDN Processing, General (Subchapter 2)](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000077928?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) and [Part 2: Chapter 8 - Miscellaneous Target Processing](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000072991?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) describe data entry procedures common to more than one benefit.  [Part 2: Chapter 7- Education Letters](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000072899?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)  describes letters, applicable to more than one benefit, that can be produced from BDN. [Part 2: Chapter 7- Education Letters](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000072899?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)  lists the education codes used in BDN.  For information that is specific to a particular education benefit, consult the appropriate manual part. 

(1)  For chapter 30, see [Part 5 Chapter 1 - General](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073756?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&).

(2)  For chapter 32/903, see [Part 6: Chapter 1 - General](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000076271?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)

(3)  For chapter 35, see [Part 7: Chapter 1 - General](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073664?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)

(4)  For chapter 1606, [M22-4 Part 8: Chapter 1 - (Chapter 1606 Provisions)](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073835?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) and [Training Guide 22-99-5, The Chapter 1606 User Guide, Table of Contents](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073083?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), [The Chapter 1606 User Guide - Table of Contents](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000075903?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) User Guide]. 

**1.02  [BDN]**

---

BDN has various components, each doing a specific job.  The following components apply to education processing.

**a.  Beneficiary Identification and Record Locator System**.  BIRLS (Beneficiary Identification and Records Locator Subsystem) is an automated index of veteran and beneficiary records.  An operator enters the information in each record when establishing a file number.  The BIRLS record contains basic service information, some basic personal information, insurance information, and the location of the claims folder and any other folder.  BIRLS is maintained at the [AAC (Austin Automation Center) in Austin, Texas. 

**b.  Veterans Assistance Discharge System**.  VADS (Veterans Assistance Discharge System) is a letter generating system that contains selected DD Form 214 information for discharged veterans.  (See [PART 01, GENERAL. CHAPTER 05 - MISCELLANEOUS](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000064143?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) for more information.)  The AAC enters DD Form 214 information into the VADS record.  BDN cannot access the VADS record directly.  However, a new VADS record generates a new BIRLS record or updates an existing BIRLS record.  The AAC maintains the VADS system.

**c.  Benefits Delivery Network Regional Systems**.  BDNRS (Benefit Delivery Network Regional Systems) acts on information entered at the RO (Regional Office) before sending it on to the TCS (Target Central System).  The BDNRS perform screen edits and generate awards and other authorization actions.  They also maintain the PIF, issue development letters and perform the WIPP (Work In Process) function.  BDNRS formats the transactions and sends them to TCS for final processing.  The five BDNRS are in Austin (Western), Hines (Central and Midsouth), and Philadelphia (Southern and Eastern).

**d.  Target Central System**.  TCS is an umbrella term that actually represents several main processing systems for all award and related actions.  It is at TCS that each benefit payment system maintains its master file and generates the payment information for the Treasury Department to produce benefits checks.  For each benefit chapter (i.e., 30, 32, 35, 1606), TCS maintains a separate file of benefit master records.  The master file is a disk data base used for inquiries and for generating transactions.  For chapter 35 there are two copies of the master file:  the BDN master file, and the master tape file.  TCS also maintains additional files required for processing benefit claims.   These include the chapter 32 banking file, the DOD (Department of Defense) eligibility files used for chapter 30 and 1606] claims, the facility file and the accounting files.  TCS is at the Hines BDC.

**1.03  [BDN PAYMENT SYSTEMS]**

---

The four BDN payment systems each consist of four major elements:

**a.  On-Line Screen Processing.** On-line screen processing performs defined functions to individual records.  It consists of all the screen displays, data entry, and behind the scenes processing that makes up an award or fiscal action.  Following is a description of each of the major components of on-line processing.

(1)  Data Formatting.  No matter how you access a BDN screen, BDN formats information for display on your terminal.  The module that retrieves that information and displays it on your terminal is an on-line module.

(2)  Data Entry.  The process of entering new or changed information on the screen.  Normally this is done by manually typing the information on the screen.  Some information, such as monthly rate, is actually entered by the system during GAD (Generate and Display) or GAP (Generate and Print) processing.

(3)  Data Edits.  Another important on-line screen function is data editing.  Edits are checks (rules) programmed into the system to validate data.  Edits can be quite simple, such as requiring that dates be entered in a specific way.  They can also be fairly complex, such as requiring a certain type of training code with certain facility or course codes. 

(4)  Computations.  Computations are also performed in on-line processing.  These can be quite simple, like adding 10 years to the Date of Eligibility to determine the Delimiting Date, or quite complex, such as determining entitlement in chapter 30 cases.

**b.  GAD/GAP Processing.**  GAD stands for Generate and Display.  GAP stands for Generate and Print.  GAD/GAP is the cornerstone of all BDN systems.  It performs most of the major functions of the system.  Some of these are described below.

(1)  Complex Edits

(a)  GAD/GAP performs complex edits that cannot be performed on an individual screen.  Many of these involve comparisons between data on more than one screen.  For example, if you enter a beginning date on an award that is before the Date of Eligibility, GAD/GAP will prevent you from continuing the award until you change the date, or override the Date of Eligibility.

(b)  Other complex edits involve “correcting” the data entered on the screen.  For example, if you enter an ending date on an award line that is later than the date that entitlement is exhausted, GAD/GAP will generate the correct ending date and overlay your entry.

(c)  When you get an error message on a screen, it is sometimes difficult to determine if you’ve run into a screen edit or a GAD/GAP edit.  For most award processing, the difference is not important.  However, if you encounter a message that is being generated in error, it speeds correction of the problem if the source is known.  You can tell quite simply.  If you get the message without entering GAD or GAP in the next screen field before you hit the ENTER key, it is a screen edit problem. 

(2)  Award Line.  The award line that is displayed on a BDN screen is only a segment of the award line that is actually stored in the database.  In fact, all award lines contain both beginning and ending dates, although they are not all displayed.  Also, each award line contains the facility code that was current when that award line was generated.  Finally, each award line contains a specific “cost code” that is used to determine what financial account the payment is made from.  Cost codes are determined by the component and type of training.  By differentiating costs, it is easier to determine which component should be billed and to generate usage reports for the benefit.  GAD/GAP adds this data to entered award lines and generates complete award lines when necessary, such as for rate increases.

(3)  Rate Generation.  One of the most visible of the GAD/GAP functions is the generation of the monthly rates in award lines.  GAD/GAP looks up the correct rate from a table using the date and training time.

(4)  Entitlement Computation.  GAD/GAP computes the entitlement used for each award line, and deducts it from remaining entitlement.

(5)  Payment Computation.  GAD/GAP computes the amount of payment or overpayment resulting from an award or certification action.  To do this, it computes the total amount authorized by the action, offsets overpayments, if appropriate, and adds any proceeds due the claimant.

(6)  Transactions.  One of the keys to BDN processing is the concept of transactions.  In simple terms, a transaction is a pre-defined set of data that is processed by the system in a specific way.  For example, an amended award is a 14C transaction; a change of address is a 22 transaction.  GAD/GAP identifies the appropriate transaction necessary and “assembles” the information or data necessary to complete it.  This process is often called “building a transaction.”

(7)  Accounting.  The GAD/GAP modules perform all of the accounting necessary to monitor funds used by the program.  Each payment is charged to both a specific account and a general ledger account and then balanced to insure that all of the entries are in balance.  This function is extremely sophisticated.  (The chapter 30, and 1606 systems are among the few systems in any organization that perform on-line accounting for a recurring payment system).  The accounting portion of the program comprises about 30% of the entire system.

(8)  Audit Trail.  GAD/GAP prepares an audit trail that consists of an image of the master record before an award action is taken, the action itself, and an image of the master record after the action.  This audit trail is an invaluable tool in researching problems with the system.

**c.  Pending Issue File.**  Transactions that do not require authorization, such as changes of address or master record corrections (CORR) update the master record database immediately when they are entered.  Award actions that require authorization, however, do not update the master record until the authorization is completed.  In the interim between the generation and printing of the award and the authorization of the award, the entered data is stored in a PIF.  The PIF is actually a temporary storage “mini-database” for data that is pending to update a single record.

(1)  A PIF can be created either with a CEST (Claims Establishment) command (normally used only for original awards) or the CADJ (Claims Adjudication) command (normally used for supplemental awards). 

(2)  Storage of the pending action in a PIF is advantageous for several reasons.  Primarily it provides an easy means for a person inquiring to see both a pending change and the data that is being changed.  Also, it provides a means of changing the pending information without changing the master record, itself.

(3)  For chapters 30 and 1606, the master record is updated immediately after authorization of an award.  The inquiry screens always provide an accurate picture of the master records in these systems.  Chapters 32 and 35 use batch processing.  See [par. 1.10b](#110b) for chapter 32 information.  See [par. 1.11c](#111c) for chapter 35 information.

**d.  Batch Processing.**  While on-line processing performs specific functions on individual records, batch processing performs functions to groups of records - thus, the term “batch”.  For example, letters are generated in batch processing.  A computer program is written to “scan” the day’s on-line activity for cases that match specific letter criteria, the letters are formatted, and they are all sent to a printer for generation.  Generally, batch processes are run during times when the on-line system is not available for input, either at night or on weekends.  Among the other major batch processes are:

(1)  Payment Processing.  Batch processing compares the DLP (Date Last Paid) in each record with the DLC (Date Last Certified) in the record.  If the DLC is later than the DLP, payment will be generated for the period between the two.

(2)  Reports.  Most periodic reports, such as usage reports and budget reports are generated in batch.

(3)  Treasury Voucher.  The payment voucher, containing all payments generated by a system that is sent to the Department of Treasury is generated in batch.

(4)  Returned Checks.  When checks are returned, they are applied to the master records by a batch process.

(5)  DMDC Update.  The eligibility records for chapter 30 and 1606 master records that are received from DMDC (Defense Management Data Center) are entered by a batch process.

(6)  NOE and FOES Processing.  Both NOEs (Notice of Exceptions) and FOEs (Fiscal Notice of Exceptions) messages are generated in batch.

(7)  Suspend Transactions.  Suspense actions caused by delinquent certifications, DMDC updates and returned checks are generated in batch processing.

(8)  Full-File Pass.  In the chapter 30 and 1606 systems, FFP (full-file pass) is run monthly.  It does a number of required monthly functions, most important of which, for our purposes is the generation of monthly certifications.

(9)  Advance Pay Processing.  Payments from advance pay awards that have been entered on-line are generated at the appropriate time in batch processing.

(10)  Accounting.  End of Month and End of Year accounting activities are done in batch processing.

(11)  Master Record Update.  All batch processes update the master record to indicate the functions that have been performed.]

**1.04  [BDN AWARD TYPES]**

---

 The following are the types of awards processed in BDN systems. 

**a.  Original Award**.  An award that is processed with no previous master record data.

**b.  Reentrance Award**.  An award that is entered to a master record where the last No Pay Date is earlier than the award beginning date.

**c.  Amended Award**.  An award that is entered to a master record where the last No Pay Date is later than the award beginning date.

**d.  Stop/Reentrance Award**.  An award consisting of two lines in which the first line contains only a No Pay Date and End Reason, and the second line contains a Beginning Date that is equal to or later than the No Pay Date on the first line.

*NOTE 1:  Although BDN systems also process STOP, SUSPEND, and RESUME actions, they are not technically separate award types.  They are types of amended awards for which the data entry is simplified.*

*NOTE 2:  The type of award is not determined by the Reason Code used on the award line.  Award types are defined by the system according to pre-defined criteria.  Certain reason codes, however, can only be used with certain award types. See M22-4 Part II Chapter 9 par. 9.14 for a complete list of reason codes.]*

**1.05  [BDN DATA ENTRY]**

---

The methods of data entry are [directly into BDN through BDN screens, indirectly through CHAIRS (Chapter 35 Alternate Input System) for Chapter 35 cases only, and through batch entry. 

**a.  BDN Entry**.  BDN screens are the primary data entry method for the BDN system.  The operator takes information from the claims document and types it directly on the BDN] screen.  The BDNRS edits the information and identifies any errors.  If no errors appear, the system formats the information into a transaction and sends it to TCS at the Hines BDC.  At TCS, processing occurs according to the type of benefit.

**b.  Chapter 35 Alternate Input Replacement System Entry**.  RPOs electronically send certain education transactions to the Hines BDC for the chapter 35 system using [CHAIRS (Chapter 35 Alternate Input Replacement System) USER GUIDE](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000078784?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)).  CHAIRS uses a Windows based communications system to transmit the data to Hines.  See Training Guide 22-99-2, CHAIRS User Guide, for details for using this method.  (This information will ultimately be placed into [Part 7: Chapter 2 - BDN Processing](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073682?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&).)  The RPO (Regional Processing Office) accesses CHAIRS and enters the data from worksheet(s).  CHAIRS makes preliminary edits of data.  If the CHAIRS edits do not detect any errors, CHAIRS sends the transaction(s) to Hines.  Hines extracts the submitted data and prepares a magnetic tape for batch processing into the next cycle.  BDN should show submitted transactions within 2 cycles.

**c.**  **Batch Method of Entry**.  Batch entry refers to data entered from a source other than an operator using a terminal.  Batch input can be processed in a separate batch update program, or it can emulate operator input and be processed during the recurring transaction update process appropriate to the benefit.  For example, mass ending date changes are a form of batch entry, used by the RO which process in a separate batch update program.  Chapter 30 monthly certifications of attendance, on the other hand, emulate operator input.  Scanning devices are used to read the bar code on the certification form, and the data is stored in a PC (Personal Computer) which is linked to BDN.  The PC then transmits the transactions to TCS for immediate processing during the day.  [Batch processing usually occurs at scheduled times without immediate interaction with a terminal operator.] 

**1.06  [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]**

 

---

**1.07  [RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]**

---

 *[NOTE: Information previously contained in this paragraph has been moved to [subchapter III.](#SIII)]*

 

**SUBCHAPTER II.  [BDN MASTER RECORDS]**

**1.08  EDUCATION MASTER RECORDS - GENERAL**

---

**a.**  In each computer system, a master record is established for each benefit applicant to record the results of the adjudicator's award decision.  Only that information which is needed for subsequent action is stored in the master record.  Therefore, the record includes benefit eligibility information, disallowance reasons or payment authorizations in the form of award lines, other payment-related data such as proceeds and accounts receivable, and usage history in the form of payment history segments (chapters 30, 32 and 1606) and transaction history segments (chapters 30 and 1606 only).

**b.** Each claimant's benefit record includes a "Type" code which indicates the payment status of the record.  Master record types used in most of the education benefit systems are:

(1)  Type A, Running Award Record.  Processing an education award establishes a type A master record.  An account remains a type A master record until release of the final payment or lump sum payment (for chapters 30 and 35 cases).  Suspended records are Type A.

(2)  Type D, Education Accounts Receivable Record.  A Type D master record is established when a payment transaction establishes an accounts receivable and there is no existing benefit master.  If an original award transaction is submitted, it changes the account to a type A master record.

(3)  Type E, Terminated Education Record.  A type A master record becomes a type E master record after the system releases the final payment.  Type E indicates that the claimant's training has terminated.

(4)  Type J, Denied Education Record.  A disallowance transaction establishes a type J master record.  Generally a J type master indicates that the claimant was not eligible for benefits.

(5)  Type H, Application Record (Chs. 34/35 only).  The chapter 34/35 system will accept and process application data (the 03A transaction) from CHAIRS entry, creating a type H master record.  These records contain minimal identification and basic statistical information.  BDN submits application data as a part of a combined award transaction, or, for chapter 30 only, as part of a C/E (certificate of eligibility) transaction.

(6)  Type I, Certificate of Eligibility Record (Chs. 30, 1606, 34/35 Only).  A C/E transaction establishes a type I master record.  Chapters 30 and 1606 are the only benefits which use BDN to issue C/Es.  The chapter 34/35 system will accept a C/E transaction (03C) from CHAIRS entry.  It will change a type H master to a type I and add eligibility data to the record.  When the award transaction processes, it will change the master record to a Type A.

(7)  Type R, Bank Refund Record (Chs. 30 & 32 Only).  A refund of all a chapter 32 participant's contributions establishes a Type R record.  A chapter 30 death benefit also establishes a Type R record. 

(8)  Type T, Death Refund Record (Ch. 30 Only).  A refund of all a chapter 30 participant's contributions to his or her beneficiaries establishes a Type T record.

(9)  Type U, Unassociated Record (Chs. 30, 32 Only).  This master record is created when a returned check does not match an existing benefit master record.  Only Finance personnel may access such records.

(10)  Type P, Purged Record (Chs. 30, 1606] Only).  For one month after the system purges a record, the master record remains as this type.  Then it is deleted from the system. 

**c.**  In addition to the claimant's benefit records, education benefit processing requires additional files.  All the benefit programs require the facility file which has a record for every approved facility.  Chapters 30, 32 and 1606 also require eligibility data which is provided by DOD.

(1)  Facility File.  The facility file record includes the facility name and address.  Any benefit processing that requires this information, such as advance payments, retrieves it from the facility file.

(2)  Chapter 30 and 1606 DOD Records.  DMDC receives updates from each of the branches of service, consolidates them, and then forwards this information to the Hines BDC.  DMDC provides weekly updates for chapter 1606 and chapter 30 cases except for category II.  (See [Part 5 Chapter 1 - General](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073756?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)  for a definition of the chapter 30 categories.)  Hines updates the DOD files as shown on the schedules of operations, described in [paragraph 1.13.](#113)

*[NOTE:  Chapter 30, category II records are not updated.  See par. 4.10a(2).)*

*(3)  Chapter 32 Banking Records.  The banking system records VEAP (Post-Vietnam Era Veterans Educational Assistance Program) participants' monthly contributions to the chapter 32 program.  This record is the basis for the computation of education benefits or disenrollment refund.  Each service department forwards to the Hines BDC a monthly tape(s) of statistical and financial information.  Hines uses these tapes to update each participant's master record as soon as possible after the tape is received.  Normally, all updates are received and processed by the 15th of each month.  The PPU (Payment Processing Unit) of the Hines BDC Finance Division is able to enter limited correction transactions; this input/update cycle is reflected on the schedule of operations.  The BDC sends a monthly error and action listing to each service department, which they use to take corrective actions.]*

**1.09  EDUCATION MASTER RECORDS - CHAPTER 30**

---

**a.  Benefit Records**.  Benefit information for chapter 30 claimants appears on the M21, M22, [and M23 BDN screens as described in [Part 2: Chapter 4 - Master Record Inquiry (Chapter 30)](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000077340?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)  Accounts receivable information appears on the M01 screen as described in chapter 3.  Chapter 30 uses on-line update.  When the operator sends the transaction to TCS, the master record is updated immediately.  With the exception of the monthly certification transaction, all transactions are operator-entered on a screen.

**b.  DOD Records**.  For chapter 30, DOD records appear on the BDN 30D screen.  The records include the claimant's program participation, reduction in pay amount, dates of service, separation reason, kicker, rank, and character of discharge, plus information on Selected Reserve service subsequent to active service.  DMDC creates this record early in the serviceperson's career and updates it periodically to reflect changes such as discharge from service, entry into the Selected Reserve, or reentry into active service.  See [Part 2: Chapter 4 - Master Record Inquiry (Chapter 30)](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000077340?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)of this part for detailed information concerning DOD records, and [Part 5 Chapter 1 - General](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073756?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) for chapter 30 details.]

**1.10  EDUCATION MASTER RECORDS - CHAPTER 32**

---

Chapter 32 records contain banking record data in all cases and benefit data in those cases where the claimant has applied for benefits.

**a.  Chapter 32 Banking System**.  All of a chapter 32 participant's financial contributions while on active duty are in the banking record.  [BDN] displays this information on the M26, M27, M28 and M29 screens.  See [Part 2: Chapter 3 - Master Record Inquiry (Overview and [Chs. 32, 34, 35 and Secs. 901, AND 903])](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000075787?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) for descriptions of these screens and instructions for accessing them.  The only [RPO] actions that can change a banking record which does not also have a benefit master record are a refund and a change of address.

**b.  Benefit Data**.  A chapter 32 claimant's award information is in the benefit portion of his or her record.  The benefit information appears on the M21, M22, M23 and M24 screens.  Accounts receivable information appears on the M01 screen.  These screens are all described in [Part 2: Chapter 3 - Master Record Inquiry (Overview and [Chs. 32, 34, 35 and Secs. 901, AND 903])](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000075787?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&).  Chapter 32 benefit processing uses batch updating.  Transactions are entered and edited on the screen.  When authorized, the transactions are sent to TCS and queued for processing overnight.  The master record updates by the next morning.

**1.11  EDUCATION MASTER RECORDS - CHAPTERS 34 and 35**

---

**a.  General**.   Active chapter 34 and all chapter 35 records appear on the M21, M22, M23 and M24 screens in the [BDN Systems].  Inactive chapter 34 records appear on the M25 screen.  Accounts receivable information for both chapter 34 and 35 appears on the M01 screen.  See [Part 2: Chapter 3 - Master Record Inquiry (Overview and [Chs. 32, 34, 35 and Secs. 901, AND 903])](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000075787?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) for detailed information on these screens.  These screens display data taken from the BDN data base.  VA Form 20-8270a, Education Master Record--Audit Writeout, also shows master record data for chapters 34 and 35.  The writeout is a print of master record data from the tape benefit file.

**b.  Active and Inactive Files**.  For chapter 34 records, there is an active and an inactive file.  Records which meet certain criteria for inactivity are transferred to the inactive file.  The remaining records are in the active file, which also includes all chapter 35 records.  The same master record never should appear concurrently in both the active and inactive files.  Each file, active and inactive, has its own processing system.  Inactive system processing contains procedures and considerations unique to its limited purpose. (See [Part 7: Chapter 2 - BDN Processing](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073682?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) for details concerning activation of an inactive file.)  No update processing can occur against any record for which only an M25 screen is accessible.  Reactivation of a chapter 34 master record requires a folder relocation transaction, either through BIRLS or directly into the chapter 34/35 system.  Successful reactivation should be accomplished within two update cycles.

**c.  Cycle processing**.  For chapter 34/35, the system stores all the  transactions created each day in a batch.  When an update cycle is scheduled, all of the batches that have been created since the last update cycle are processed.  In addition to the transaction batches created in BDN, CHAIRS input batches are also processed.  The update cycle uses the tape copy of the master file for update processing.  At the end of the cycle, the BDN data base is updated to reflect the processed transactions.  (Users can access only the [BDN] data base and not the tape data base.)

**1.12 EDUCATION MASTER RECORDS - CHAPTER [1606]**

---

Chapter [1606] records consist of two major files, DOD records and the benefit records.

**a.  DOD Records**.  [For chapter 1606, DOD records appear on the BDN DOD screen.  The records have certain data on persons in the Selected Reserve components, including the claimant's Selected Reserve eligibility status and other statistical data.  DMDC creates this record early in the Selected Reservist's career and updates it periodically to reflect changed circumstances such as release from a reserve component.  DMDC mails this information weekly on magnetic tape to Hines BDC where it is processed into BDN.  See [Training Guide 22-99-5, The Chapter 1606 User Guide, Table of Contents](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073083?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) for a detailed explanation of this record.

**b.  Benefit Records**.  Benefit information for chapter 1606 claimants appears on the M21, M22, and M23 BDN screens.  Accounts receivable information appears on the M01 screen.  See [Training Guide 22-99-5, The Chapter 1606 User Guide, Table of Contents](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073083?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) for details.  Chapter 1606 uses on-line update.  When the operator sends the transaction to TCS, the master record is updated immediately.]

 

**1.13 [SCHEDULE OF OPERATIONS]**

---

 *[NOTE 1:  [Figures (1.01 through 1.04)](#f101) show representations of the schedule of operations generated by the Hines BDC for the different benefit programs.*

*NOTE 2:  None of the education systems generate letters overnight.  Printing and mailing occurs later in accordance with each schedule of operation.*

**a.  General**.  The Hines BDC publishes a schedule of operations for each education system.  Schedules come out monthly.  These schedules show when various types of batch processing occur.  The schedule tells when transactions are processed, when letters and error message writeouts will be released, when payment tapes will go to the Treasury and what the anticipated date of the benefit checks will be.  RPOs sometimes need to analyze these schedules to determine when processing has happened or will happen.  Since the schedule of operations is prepared for data processing personnel at Hines BDC as well as for field station personnel, it may contain some terminology that is beyond the scope of this manual.  Also, future schedules may vary in content somewhat from the samples in this chapter, due to changes in circumstances.

**b.  Chapter 30 Schedule of Operations**.  (See [fig. 1.01.](#f101))  Chapter 30 master records are updated as soon as the operator authorizes the transaction.

(1)  Benefit runs are generally scheduled daily, at the end of the processing day indicated on the schedule.  The benefit run uses the daily transaction processing results to identify cases requiring letters, reports, certifications of attendance, and payments.  The notes and comments listed below the schedule indicate which items are released on a basis that is different from the scheduled dates. 

(2)  An advance payment processing run occurs each week, generally on Monday, as an addition to the benefit run.  This run issues advance payments and CODs (Certifications of Delivery) for advance payment awards due for payment release.

(3)  FFP occurs monthly.  FFP issues certification forms, processes delinquent certifications, generates collection letters, and produces reports.  The release of certification forms to the Postal Service is scheduled to insure delivery on or about the first of the following month.

(4)  The schedule is a chart with columns for anticipated dates and rows for each benefit run and the monthly FFP.

(a)  Column 1 shows the benefit runs and FFP for the month.  Asterisks (\*\*) indicate those dates on which Advance Payment and COD processing are also scheduled.  

 

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| MARCH  2000 | | EDUCATION | | | VA BDC HINES, IL | |
| Montgomery GI Bill | | CHAPTER 30 | | | PREPARED:   02-07-00 | |
| Active Duty | | SCHEDULE OF OPERATIONS | | | PUBLISHED:  02-10-00 | |
| 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 |
| PROCESSING  ACTIVITIES | JULIAN  DAY  NUMBER | DAILY PROCESSING  2100 | LETTERS  REPORTS  CERTS | TRANSMIT  PAYFILES &  VOUCHERS TO TREASURY | ANTICIPATED  DATE OF  CHECK | ANTICIPATED  DATE OF  EFT  PAYMENTS |
| BENEFIT RUN  \*\* | 061 | 03-01 | @ 03-07 | 03-03 | 03-07 | 03-06 |
| BENEFIT RUN | 062 | 03-02 | @ 03-08 | 03-06 | 03-08 | 03-07 |
| BENEFIT RUN | 063 | 03-03 | @ 03-09 | 03-07 | 03-09 | 03-08 |
| BENEFIT RUN  \*\* | 066 | 03-06 | @ 03-10 | 03-08 | 03-10 | 03-09 |
| BENEFIT RUN | 067 | 03-07 | @03-13 | 03-09 | 03-13 | 03-10 |
| BENEFIT RUN | 068 | 03-08 | @ 03-14 | 03-10 | 03-14 | 03-13 |
| BENEFIT RUN | 069 | 03-09 | @ 03-15 | 03-13 | 03-15 | 03-14 |
| BENEFIT RUN | 070 | 03-10 | @ 03-16 | 03-14 | 03-16 | 03-15 |
| BENEFIT RUN  \*\* | 073 | 03-13 | @ 03-17 | 03-15 | 03-17 | 03-16 |
| BENEFIT RUN | 074 | 03-14 | @ 03-20 | 03-16 | 03-20 | 03-17 |
| BENEFIT RUN | 075 | 03-15 | @ 03-21 | 03-17 | 03-21 | 03-20 |
| BENEFIT RUN | 076 | 03-16 | @ 03-22 | 03-20 | 03-22 | 03-21 |
| BENEFIT RUN | 077 | 03-17 | @ 03-23 | 03-21 | 03-23 | 03-22 |
| BENEFIT RUN  \*\* | 080 | 03-20 | @ 03-24 | 03-22 | 03-24 | 03-23 |
| BENEFIT RUN | 081 | 03-21 | @ 03-27 | 03-23 | 03-27 | 03-24 |
| BENEFIT RUN | 082 | 03-22 | @ 03-28 | 03-24 | 03-28 | 03-27 |
| FFP \* | 082 | 03-22 | 03-28 | -- | -- | -- |
| BENEFIT RUN | 083 | 03-23 | @ 03-29 | 03-27 | 03-29 | 03-28 |
| BENEFIT RUN | 084 | 03-24 | @ 03-30 | 03-28 | 03-30 | 03-29 |
| BENEFIT RUN  \*\* | 087 | 03-27 | @ 03-31 | 03-29 | 03-31 | 03-30 |
| BENEFIT RUN | 088 | 03-28 | @ 04-03 | 03-30 | 04-03 | 03-31 |
| BENEFIT RUN | 089 | 03-29 | @ 04-04 | 03-31 | 04-04 | 04-03 |
| EOM ACCOUNTING \*\*\* | 091 | 03-31 | --- | --- | --- | --- |

\*  Chapter 30 Certs (8979’s) out of EOM FFP G280, are to be postmarked and released to the Post Office NLT 03-28.

\*\*  Includes Advance Pay run and Certificate of Delivery of Advance Pay.

\*\*\*    No BENEFIT RUN will process during the last two workdays (03-30 and 03-31) due to EOM ACCOUNTING.

@  Chapter 30 Certs (8979’s) out of G280 daily runs are to be released the next workday following processing.

*NOTE*:  NOES processing (Chap 30 & 1606) will occur each Thursday night.  This processing will occur whether a tape is received from DMDC or not.  Foes will be available on the day following the BENEFIT RUN.

**Figure 1.01  Chapter 30 Schedule of Operations**

(b)  Column 4 shows the date reports, collection letters, and certification forms are issued, as modified by the notes below the schedule.

(c)  Column 5 shows the date payment tapes and vouchers go to the Kansas City TDC (Treasury Disbursing Center).

(d)  Column 6 shows the anticipated date that the claimant will receive checks.

(e)  Column 7 shows the anticipated date of EFT (Electronic Fund Transfers).

**c.  Chapter 32 Schedule of Operations**.  (See [fig. 1.02](#f102).)  Chapter 32 transactions from the BDNRS process in TCS overnight.  By the next morning, the master records in TCS are updated to reflect the prior day's work.  This daily batch processing, as well as most of the banking system processing is included in the chapter 32 schedule of operations.  As noted at the end of the schedule, military service department updates to the banking records are processed when received rather than on a scheduled basis.  The schedule is a chart with columns representing target dates and rows representing the processing activities.  The columns show dates for daily/cycle processing, release of payment tapes and vouchers, checks, data base updates, and release of letters. 

(1)  Benefit Daily.  Each "Benefit Daily" routine takes the transactions completed that day and begins processing them at 8 P.M.  During the "Benefit Daily" run, notices of exception are generated, letters are issued and payments are generated for retroactive or new awards.  Once-a-month batch input transactions generated from other runs also process during the "Benefit Daily" run; examples are school code changes, and mass ending date changes submitted by the facility.

(2)  Benefit Recurring Pay (BIG PAY).  BIG PAY is the monthly pass of the benefit record which generates all recurring benefit checks for delivery on the first of the following month.  It also updates records for delinquent certifications and generates numerous reports.  It is similar to chapter 30 FFP.

(3)  Cycle Processing Activities

(a)  Benefit advance payments are scheduled to run four times a month.  One of these benefit advance payments is a part of BIG PAY; the other three benefit advance payments are individual cycles.  These cycles are called "Benefit Advance Pay."

(b)  Banking system update transactions submitted by the PPU are processed weekly in the numbered Bank Cycles.  Their input is limited to certain record correction transactions, refunds and changes of address.

 

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | EDUCATION | | | VA BDC HINES, IL | | |
| MARCH  2000 | CHAPTER 32 | | | PREPARED:   09-20-99 | | |
|  | SCHEDULE OF OPERATIONS | | | PUBLISHED:  02-10-00 | | |
| 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 |
| PROCESSING  ACTIVITIES | JULIAN  DAY  NUMBER | DAILY/CYCLE  PROCESSING  2100 | TRANSMIT PAYFILES & VOUCHERS TO TREASURY | ANTICIPATED  DATE OF  CHECK | UPDATE  DATA BASE  BY 0530 | 21-8992  LETTERS  DATE |
| BEN CLEANUP/MODIFY STATUS FILE (E496) | 061 | 03-01 | - | - | - | - |
| BENEFIT DAILY | 061 | 03-01 | 03-03 | 03-07 | 03-02 | 03-07 |
| \* 1) BANK CYCLE 1 | 061 | 03-01 | - | - | 03-02 | - |
| BENEFIT CONTROL  MASTER (E459) | 061 | 03-01 | - | - | - | - |
| BENEFIT DAILY | 063 | 03-03 | 03-07 | 03-09 | 03-04 | 03-09 |
| \* 2) BANK CYCLE 2 | 063 | 03-03 | - | - | 03-04 | - |
| BENEFIT ADVANCE  PAY CYCLE 1 | 064 | 03-04 | 03-07 | 03-09 | 03-06 | - |
| WEEKLY BANK  SEQUENTIAL (E324) | 064 | 03-04 | - | - | 03-06 | - |
| BENEFIT CONTROL  MASTER (E459) | 064 | 03-04 | - | - | - | - |
| CHAINWALKERS  BEN, UNASSO, BK | 064 | 03-04 | - | - | - | - |
| BENEFIT DAILY | 066 | 03-06 | 03-08 | 03-10 | 03-07 | 03-10 |
| BANK VADS  MONTHLY (E341) | 067 | 03-07 | - | - | 03-08 | - |
| BENEFIT DAILY | 068 | 03-08 | 03-10 | 03-14 | 03-09 | 03-14 |
| BENEFIT DAILY | 070 | 03-10 | 03-14 | 03-16 | 03-11 | 03-16 |
| \* 3) BANK CYCLE 3 | 070 | 03-10 | - | - | 03-11 | - |
| BENEFIT ADVANCE  PAY CYCLE 2 | 071 | 03-11 | 03-14 | 03-16 | 03-13 | - |
| WEEKLY BANK  SEQUENTIAL (E324) | 071 | 03-11 | - | - | 03-13 | - |
| BENEFIT CONTROL MASTER (E459) | 071 | 03-11 | - | - | - | - |
| CHAINWALKERS  BEN, UNASSO, BK | 071 | 03-11 | - | - | - | - |
| BENEFIT DAILY | 073 | 03-13 | 03-15 | 03-17 | 03-14 | 03-17 |
| BENEFIT DAILY | 075 | 03-15 | 03-17 | 03-21 | 03-16 | 03-21 |
| BENEFIT CONTROL  MASTER (E459) | 075 | 03-15 | - | - | - | - |
| SCHOOL CODE MASS END DATES EDIT | 076 | 03-16 | - | - | - | - |
| BENEFIT SCHOOL CODE CHANGES (E422) | 076 | 03-16 | - | - | 03-17 | - |
| BENEFIT MASS END DATE CHANGES (E423) | 076 | 03-16 | - | - | 03-17 | - |

**PAGE 1 OF 3**

**Figure 1.02.  Chapter 32 Schedule of Operations**

 

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | EDUCATION | | | VA BDC HINES, IL | | |
| MARCH  2000 | CHAPTER 32 | | | PREPARED:   09-20-99 | | |
|  | SCHEDULE OF OPERATIONS | | | PUBLISHED:  02-10-00 | | |
| 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 |
| PROCESSING  ACTIVITIES | JULIAN  DAY  NUMBER | DAILY/CYCLE  PROCESSING  2100 | TRANSMIT PAYFILES &  VOUCHERS TO TREASURY | ANTICIPATED  DATE OF  CHECK | UPDATE  DATA BASE  BY 0530 | 21-8992  LETTERS  DATE |
| BENEFIT DAILY | 077 | 03-17 | 03-21 | 03-23 | 03-18 | 03-23 |
| \* 4) BANK CYCLE 4 | 077 | 03-17 | - | - | 03-18 | - |
| BENEFIT ADVANCE  PAY CYCLE 3 | 078 | 03-18 | 03-21 | 03-23 | 03-20 | - |
| WEEKLY BANK  SEQUENTIAL (E324) | 078 | 03-18 | - | - | 03-20 | - |
| BENEFIT CONTROL  MASTER (E459) | 078 | 03-18 | - | - | - | - |
| CHAINWALKERS  BEN, UNASSO, BK | 078 | 03-18 | - | - | - | - |
| BENEFIT DAILY | 080 | 03-20 | 03-22 | 03-24 | 03-21 | 03-24 |
| BENEFIT DAILY | 082 | 03-22 | 03-24 | 03-28 | 03-23 | 03-28 |
| BENEFIT CONTROL  MASTER (E459) | 082 | 03-22 | - | - | - | - |
| BENEFIT DAILY | 084 | 03-24 | 03-28 | 03-30 | 03-25 | 03-30 |
| BENEFIT MONTHLY  PROCESSING (E471) | 084 | 03-24 | - | - | - | - |
| BENEFIT RECURRING PAY (BIG PAY-E421) | 085 | 03-25 | 03-28 | 03-31 | 03-27 | 03-31 |
| WEEKLY BANK  SEQUENTIAL (E324) | 085 | 03-25 | - | - | 03-27 | - |
| BENEFIT CONTROL  MASTER (E459) | 085 | 03-25 | - | - | - | - |
| CHAINWALKERS  BEN, UNASSO, BK | 085 | 03-25 | - | - | - | - |
| BENEFIT DAILY | 087 | 03-27 | 03-29 | 03-31 | 03-28 | 03-31 |
| BENEFIT CONTROL  MASTER (E459) | 087 | 03-27 | - | - | - | - |
| MONTHLY BANK  TREASURY (E330) | 087 | 03-27 | 03-29 | 03-31 | - | - |
| BENEFIT IHL CERT  MERGE (E486M) | 087 | 03-27 | - | - | - | - |
| BENEFIT STAT  PROCESSING (E462) | 087 | 03-27 | - | - | - | - |
| FORT SHERIDAN  EXTRACT (E437) | 088 | 03-28 | - | - | - | - |
| BENEFIT AGING A/R  REPORT (E469) | 088 | 03-28 | - | - | - | - |
| BENEFIT A/R  REPORT (E467) | 088 | 03-28 | - | - | - | - |

**PAGE 2 OF 3**

**Figure 1.02.  Chapter 32 Schedule of Operations (Continued)**

 

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | EDUCATION | | | VA BDC HINES, IL | | |
| MARCH  2000 | CHAPTER 32 | | | PREPARED:   09-20-99 | | |
|  | SCHEDULE OF OPERATIONS | | | PUBLISHED:  02-10-00 | | |
| 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 |
| PROCESSING  ACTIVITIES | JULIAN  DAY  NUMBER | DAILY/CYCLE  PROCESSING  2100 | TRANSMIT PAYFILES &  VOUCHERS TO TREASURY | ANTICIPATED  DATE OF  CHECK | UPDATE  DATA BASE  BY 0530 | 21-8992  LETTERS  DATE |
| BENEFIT DELETE  UNASSOCIATED (E430) | 090 | 03-30 | - | - | 03-31 | - |
| BENEFIT PRE-EOAM  MARCH | 091 | 03-31 | - | - | - | - |
| BENEFIT EOAM  MARCH | 091 | 03-31 | - | - | - | - |

   \* FINANCE WILL PROVIDE PULLOFF NOTIFICATION (VIA EXCHANGE) TO OPERATIONS.

   \* BANK CYCLE 1      02-25-2000            \* BANK CYCLE 2       03-01-2000

   \* BANK CYCLE 3      03-08-2000            \* BANK CYCLE 4       03-15-2000

   NOTE:    Bank Service updating must be completed as Service tapes are received.  Julian Day Number will correspond with the Benefit activity processing on a given day.

   NOTE:    The Teletype cutoff date will be twenty-four hours following the scheduled release date of the payfiles and vouchers to Treasury.  If payfiles are released on Friday or the day before a holiday, the date would be the workday following the release of the payfiles.

 

**Figure 1.02.  Chapter 32 Schedule of Operations (Continued)**

 

(4)  Other Processing Activities. The other processing activities indicated on the schedule generally do not directly affect the benefit portion of chapter 32 records.  Their purpose is frequently to insure the integrity of the data base.  These activities are generally processed over the weekends.

**d.  Chapter 34 and 35 Schedule of Operations**.  (See [fig. 1.03](#f103).)  Generally, chapter 34/35 update transactions are processed twice a week.  Hines BDC queues the daily transaction batches to process in the next scheduled cycle.  There are usually 3 to 7 days between cycles.  When a cycle processes, the transactions first update the master tape file.  Approximately 3 days after the cycle is completed, the master records in the BDN data base update to reflect the processed transactions.

(1)  Numbered Cycles.  The schedule shows cycle processing in a chart with columns for target dates and rows for each cycle.  There are two charts.  One shows the current processing month.  The other shows the first two cycles of the next processing month.

(a)  Column 1 shows the cycles for the month.  Each month has eight or nine processing cycles, averaging two a week.  During these cycles, all the information sent to the Hines BDC is processed, regardless of the input method.  Two cycles scheduled each month do not process RPO input.  One is an unnumbered statistical processing cycle and the other is cycle number 6 or 7 at the end of the month.  The explanations (highlighted with asterisks) for each non-input cycle appear below the chart.  Cycle 0 is the first cycle of the current processing month and generates recurring benefits checks for release the first of the calendar month.

(b)  Column 2 gives the date the cycle processes.  It also shows the cutoff time for receipt of transactions.  The cycle process starts at 8 P.M.

(c)  Column 3 shows the date and the time the system releases the payment tapes and vouchers to a TDC.  Cycle 0 payment tapes go to the Chicago TDC, which separates them by ZIP code and distributes them to the Philadelphia, Birmingham, Kansas City, and San Francisco TDCS for disbursing.  The Kansas City TDC disburses payments from all other cycles.

(d)  Column 4 shows the anticipated date of the check and the date the TDC will release it.  For checks processed cycle 0, the date the claimant can expect to receive the check appears.

(e)  Column 5 shows the latest date the master record updates in BDN to reflect the transactions processed during the cycle.  This is also the date the NOE listing is available on BDN.  At this time, the system clears the PIF of all processed transactions.

(f)  Column 6 shows the date Hines BDC releases the error message writeouts and letters.

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | | | EDUCATION | | | VA BDC HINES, IL | |
| MARCH 2000 | | | CHAPTER 34 & 35 | | | PREPARED:  09-20-99 | |
|  | | | SCHEDULE OF OPERATIONS | | | PUBLISHED: 02-10-00 | |
| 1 | 2 | | 3 | 4 | | 5 | 6 |
| CYCLE | CYCLE BEGINS AFTER END OF ONLINE DAY | | TRANSMIT PAYFILES & VOUCHERS TO TREASURY | ANTICIPATED DATE OF  CHECK | | UPDATE DATA BASE MASTER FILE BY 0530 | FORMS  & LETTERS  20-8270a  SPL CYC O/P |
| MAR 0 | 02-22  TU | | \*02-28 | 03-01 | | 02-25 | 03-01 |
|  | 02-23  W | | EOAM | Feb | | Stat | Processing |
| 1 | 02-24  TH | | 03-01 | 03-07 | | 02-28 | 03-03 |
| 2 | 02-28  M | | 03-03 | 03-08 | | 03-02 | 03-07 |
| 3 | 03-02  TH | | 03-08 | 03-10 | | 03-06 | 03-10 |
| 4 | 03-06  M | | 03-10 | 03-14 | | 03-09 | 03-14 |
| 5 | 03-09  TH | | 03-15 | 03-17 | | 03-13 | 03-17 |
| 6 | 03-13  M | | 03-17 | 03-21 | | 03-16 | 03-21 |
| \*\* 7 | 03-16  TH | | No Field | Station Input | | 03-20 | 03-24 |
| 8 | 03-20  M | | 03-24 | 03-28 | | 03-23 | 03-28 |
| WEEKLY FACILITY FILE PROCESSING | | | | | | | |
| TRANS REC’D BDC BY COB FRIDAY | | 22-1936 & ERROR LIST BY FRIDAY OF THE FOLLOWING WEEK | | | NOTE:  OLAF TO WEDNESDAY FACILITY FILE PROCESSING WILL BE DUE IN HINES BDC BY 1800 EACH TUESDAY | | |
| FOR ACCOUNTING PURPOSES, CYCLE0 MARWILL BE CONSIDERED*FEB*BUSINESS | | | | | | | |
| INACTIVE FILE PROCESSING02-18, 02-23, 02-25, 03-01, 03-03, 03-08, 03-10, 03-17 | | | | | | | |
| 02-16/03-22CUTOFF FOR RECEIPT OF REQUEST FOR 860 MSG WRITEOUTS | | | | | | | |
| \* 02-28 AND 03-29  TRANSMIT DIRECT AND ADVANCE PAY VOUCHERS AND PAYFILES  TO TREASURY BY 0830 | | | | | | | |
| \*\* 03-13  BDC CUTOFF: MASS ENDING DATE & SCHOOL CODE CHANGES FOR CYC7 MARNFSI PROCESSING | | | | | | | |
| RELEASE CYC PAYMENT LIST TO FIELD STATIONS & EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES WITHIN 24 HOURS AFTER RELEASE OF PAYFILES | | | | | | | |
| RELEASE CYCLE CONTROL REPORT 1 ON FIRST WORKDAY AFTER CYCLE PROCESSING | | | | | | | |
| BDC UPDATES UNASSOCIATED FILE  BY  0530 OF THE FIRST WORKDAY AFTER  COLUMN 5 DATE | | | | | | | |
| APR 0 | 03-23  TH | | \*03-29 | 03-31 | | 03-27 | 03-31 |
| 1 | 03-27  M | | 03-31 | 04-06 | | 03-30 | 04-04 |
|  | 03-28  TU | | March | Statistical | | Processing | |

**Figure 1.03.  Chapter 34/35 Schedule of Operations**

 

(2)  Special Processing Cycles.  Explanations follow for the two cycles during which no field station activity takes place.

(a)  EOAM (End of Accounting Month) Statistical Processing.  After the last accounting cycle of the month, Hines BDC processes a number of statistical reports.

(b)  No Field Station Input.  The following are some of the activities that are processed during this cycle:

1.  Changes to facility codes in individual master records when the RPO requests a facility code change.

2.  Mass ending date changes.

3.  Restoration of records from the chapter 34 inactive education master file to the active file as a result of a recycling transaction.

4.  Inactivation of chapter 34 records which meet the criteria for inactivation. 

5.  Generation of a certification tape for correspondence certification forms which go to the Chicago TDC

6.  Generation of delinquent certification letters and correspondence certifications.

7.  Conversion of type A accounts receivable to type B.  This processing generates input to the CARS (Centralized Accounts Receivable System).  CARS collects type B accounts receivable.

(3)  Other Processing.  The schedule shows when other actions process.

(a)  Weekly Facility File Processing. The facility file updates weekly with additions, deletions and changes.  Weekly processing produces VA Forms 22-1936, Compliance Survey Worksheets for Students Pursuing Training.  Upon request from an RPO, it produces listings.  BDN uses the names and addresses in the facility file for routing documents to the education institutions.  Examples include payment listings and certification forms.  Hines BDC must receive VA Forms 22-8371, Compliance Survey and Facilities Code Sheet, before close of business each Monday.  The data processes each Tuesday.  The RPOs receive output on Tuesday of the following week.

(b)  Weekly Inactive File Processing.  When RPOs submit a folder relocation transaction, this update returns the inactive records to the active file (chapter 34 only).  Weekly processing also produces master record writeouts for inactive cases. They print through the next cycle following the inactive file update.

(c)  Cutoff Date for Mass Ending Date and School Code Changes (for the month).

(d)  Cutoff for Receipt of Request for 860 MSG Writeouts.  The monthly Education System statistical processing produces various statistical reports.  They show the status of the education master file, the facility file, and the financial benefits paid during the month.  The statistical processing generates master record writeouts for specific education facilities when RPOs request them.  The system selects the facilities by the facility code, and type of training. The message code and legend associated with these writeouts is 860 -- Station Request for "School Code."

**e.  Chapter 1606 Schedule of Operations**.  (See [fig. 1.04](#f104).)  Chapter 1606 master records are updated as soon as the operator enters or authorizes the transaction.  A daily processing run occurs at the end of each processing day.  This run generates award letters and updates the WIPP system.  This processing is not reflected on the schedule of operations.  The batch processing shown on the schedule includes the following: 

(1)  Benefit runs that are scheduled at the end of the processing day indicated on the schedule.  The benefit run uses the daily transaction processing results to produce letters, reports, certifications of attendance, error messages and payments.  The notes and comments listed below the schedule indicate which items are released on a basis that is different from the scheduled dates. 

(2)  An advance payment processing run occurs each week, generally on Monday, as an addition to the benefit run.  This run issues advance payments and CODs for advance payment awards due for payment release.

(3)  An FFP occurs monthly.  FFP issues certification forms, processes delinquent certifications, collection letters, and reports.  The release of certification forms to the Postal Service is scheduled to insure delivery on or about the first of the following month.

(4)  The schedule is a chart with columns for [anticipated] dates and rows for each benefit run and the monthly FFP.

(a)  Column 1 shows the benefit runs and FFP for the month.  Asterisks (\*\*) indicate those dates on which Advance Payment and COD processing are also scheduled.  

(b)  Column 4 shows the date reports, collection letters, and certification forms are issued, as modified by the notes below the schedule.

(c)  Column 5 shows the date payment tapes and vouchers go to the TDC.

(d)  Column 6 shows the anticipated date that the claimant will receive checks.

(e)  Column 7 shows the anticipated date of EFT.

| DATE | | HEADER FOR BENEFIT | | | | LOCATION AND DATE | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | | EDUCATION | | | | VA BDC HINES, IL | | |
| JUNE 2000 | | CHAPTER 1606 | | | | PREPARED:  02-07-00 | | |
|  | | SCHEDULE OF OPERATIONS | | | | PUBLISHED: 05-10-00 | | |
| 1 | 2 | | 3 | 4 | 5 | | 6 | 7 |
| PROCESSING  ACTIVITIES | JULIAN  DAY  NUMBER | | DAILY PROCESSES  2100 | LETTERS  REPORTS  CERTS | TRANSMIT  PAYFILES & VOUCHERS TO TREASURY | | ANTICIP  DATE OF  CHECK | ANTICIP  DATE OF  EFT  PAYMENTS |
| BENEFIT RUN **\*\*** | 153 | | 06-01 | 06-07 | 06-05 | | 06-07 | N/A |
| BENEFIT RUN | 154 | | 06-02 | 06-08 | 06-06 | | 06-08 | N/A |
| BENEFIT RUN **\*\*** | 157 | | 06-05 | 06-09 | 06-07 | | 06-09 | N/A |
| BENEFIT RUN | 158 | | 06-06 | 06-12 | 06-08 | | 06-12 | N/A |
| BENEFIT RUN | 159 | | 06-07 | 06-13 | 06-09 | | 06-13 | N/A |
| BENEFIT RUN | 160 | | 06-08 | 06-14 | 06-12 | | 06-14 | N/A |
| BENEFIT RUN | 161 | | 06-09 | 06-15 | 06-13 | | 06-15 | N/A |
| BENEFIT RUN **\*\*** | 164 | | 06-12 | 06-16 | 06-14 | | 06-16 | N/A |
| BENEFIT RUN | 165 | | 06-13 | 06-19 | 06-15 | | 06-19 | N/A |
| BENEFIT RUN | 166 | | 06-14 | 06-20 | 06-16 | | 06-20 | N/A |
| BENEFIT RUN | 167 | | 06-15 | 06-21 | 06-19 | | 06-21 | N/A |
| BENEFIT RUN | 168 | | 06-16 | 06-22 | 06-20 | | 06-22 | N/A |
| BENEFIT RUN **\*\*** | 171 | | 06-19 | 06-23 | 06-21 | | 06-23 | N/A |
| BENEFIT RUN | 172 | | 06-20 | 06-26 | 06-22 | | 06-26 | N/A |
| BENEFIT RUN | 173 | | 06-21 | 06-27 | 06-23 | | 06-27 | N/A |
| **FFP** | 173 | | 06-21 | 06-27 |  | | -- | -- |
| BENEFIT RUN | 174 | | 06-22 | 06-28 | 06-26 | | 06-28 | N/A |
| BENEFIT RUN | 175 | | 06-23 | 06-29 | 06-27 | | 06-29 | N/A |
| BENEFIT RUN **\*\*** | 178 | | 06-26 | 06-30 | 06-28 | | 06-30 | N/A |
| BENEFIT RUN | 179 | | 06-27 | 07-03 | 06-29 | | 07-03 | N/A |
| BENEFIT RUN | 180 | | 06-28 | 07-05 | 06-30 | | 07-05 | N/A |
| EOM ACCOUNTING **\*\*\*** | 182 | | 06-30 | --- | --- | | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

\*\* Includes Advance Pay run and Certificate of Delivery of Advance Pay.

\*\*\*  No BENEFIT RUN will process in the last 2 workdays (**06-29 and 06-30**) due to EOM ACCOUNTING.

*NOTE*:  NOES processing (Chap 30 & 1606) will occur each Thursday night.  This processing will occur whether a tape is received from DMDC or not.  Foes will be available on the day following the BENEFIT RUN.

**Figure 1.04. Chapter [1606] Schedule of Operations**

**SUBCHAPTER III.  NON-BDN APPLICATIONS AND PROCESSING**

**1.14  NON-BDN PAYMENT SYSTEMS**

---

Most education benefits are processed using BDN.  However, some transactions cannot be processed on this system.  The exceptions are listed below:

**a.**  **PPU**.  The PPU unit at the Hines BDC handles certain chapter 32 cases that cannot be processed on the BDN system.  (See [Part 6: Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073576?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) subchapter III).

**b.  Buffalo Finance**.  The Buffalo RPO has PC systems for handling all chapter 1606 Coast Guard payments, and all chapter 1606 and chapter 32 on-the-job training, apprenticeship, flight and correspondence payments.

**c.  Chapter 30 PC**.  The RPOs maintain a PC system to handle all chapter 30 on-the-job training, apprenticeship, flight and correspondence awards and payments.

**d.  Waco Finance**.  A PC system at the Waco regional office handles all Section 901 benefit payments, letters, and accounts receivable.

**1.15  VETERANS EDUCATION CERTIFICATION PROGRAM**

---

**a.**  **General**.  VACERT (Veterans Education Certification Program) is a personal computer program that allows school officials to create enrollment certifications, notices of changes in student status and monthly certifications of flight training for students taking IHL (Institutions of Higher Learning), NCD (Non-College Degree), and vocational flight training programs.  School officials can electronically transfer the enrollment information and certifications directly to the RPOs for processing.  The RPOs use ECAP (Electronic Certification Automated Processing) to process the information submitted by VACERT.

**b.**  **Specific Information**.  School officials can use one of two TGs for VACERT, depending on which version of VACERT they are using. 

(1)  School officials should use TG 20-91-1, VACERT USERS GUIDE, REVISED if they have the DOS version of VACERT.

(2)  School officials should use TG 22-98-2, VACERT FOR WINDOWS USER'S GUIDE, if they have the Windows version of VACERT.

**1.16  ELECTRONIC CERTIFICATION AUTOMATED PROGRAM**

---

**a.**  **General**.  ECAP is a combination server and PC application that processes electronic enrollment certifications and notices of changes in student status.  It is a system that processes or attempts to process education awards without human intervention to the maximum extent possible. 

**b.**  **Specific Information**.  ECAP processes enrollment certifications and notices of changes in student status using the same BDN commands and screens that education personnel use to process education claims.  ECAP also sets up pending issues.  ECAP uses computer processing rules jointly developed by RPO personnel and concurred in by the Education Service.  ECAP can process chapter 30 claims all the way through claims authorization.  The ECAP awards are for chapter 30 trainees taking standard college degree programs measured in quarter or semester hours at IHLs.

**1.17  WEB BASED APPLICATIONS**

---

**a.**  **Web Automated Verification of Enrollment**.  WAVE (Web Automated Verification of Enrollment) is an internet application.  Claimants access this application from the Education Service's home page and submit monthly verification of enrollment information via the Internet. 

**b.**  **VANetCert**.  VANetCert (VA Net Certification) is another internet application.  School certifying officials access this application from the Education Service's home page and submit the same certification transactions using the Internet that they do using VACERT. 

**1.18  TELEPHONE APPLICATIONS**

---

**a.**  **Telephone Verification of Enrollment**.  VA has a system for chapter 30 claimants to submit monthly verifications of enrollment information using touch tone telephones.  This system uses IVR (Interactive Voice Response) technology.  Chapter 30 students can only use this telephone system if they had no change in their enrollment that needs to be verified. 

**b.**  **Toll-Free**.  VA has dedicated education toll-free telephone service to better serve our education beneficiaries.  The national telephone number is 1-888-GI BILL-1 (1-888-442-4551).  Calls are routed to the RPO with jurisdiction over the state.  The toll-free telephones use IVR technology.

**c.**  **Interactive Voice Response**.  VA uses IVR technology to allow callers to get general VA education information using touch tone telephones or voice recognition.  Chapter 30 and chapter 1606 beneficiaries can get limited master record information.  Callers that request to speak to a counselor are routed to an RPO based on the caller's area code.

 

**1.19  THE IMAGING MANAGEMENT SYSTEM**

---

VA has expanded the scanning and electronic viewing of education documents to all RPOs.

**a.**  **General**.  TIMS (The Imaging Management System) is an image based application that contains workflow to support the processing of education benefits.  Documents are received, scanned, indexed and placed into a trainee's electronic education folder.  TIMS also receives ECAP documents, which are self indexing.  Documents are then electronically distributed for processing.  TIMS supports processing of all education benefits.

**b.**  **Specific Information**.  TGs for TIMS are available for personnel scanning documents, processing education documents, and supervisors.  Additional TGs are being developed for system administrators.

**1.20  OTHER SUPPORTING APPLICATIONS**

---

**a.**  **General**.  Education processing uses other applications for specific items.  This paragraph contains general Information about these applications. 

**b.**  **Automated Reference Materials System** 

(1)  ARMS (Automated Reference Materials System) is a text retrieval system.  It allows users to quickly and accurately access the current version of all VBA procedures and regulations. 

(2)  For additional information, access the computer directory that has the ARMS files.  Double click on the "ARMS" sub-directory.  Double click on the "guide" Word document.  This Word document explains how to use ARMS. 

**c.**  **JETFORM**. 

(1)  JETFORM is a program that allows RPO users to insert appropriate information directly into an electronic version of VBA forms, and to print the final completed form on a local printer.  This is usually done for claimants that are visiting the RPO. 

(2)  For additional information on it, RPOs should have a TG or other training information in JETFORM for new users. 

**d.**  **On-Line Approval File**

(1)  General.  OLAF (On-Line Approval File) provides RPOs with the ability to quickly access school and course information.  It is used by ELRs (Education Liaison Representatives) to establish and maintain information on approved schools, job training establishments, programs, certifying officials, compliance surveys and calendars for IHLs and NCDs.  Employees at RPOs and ROs have inquiry access.

(2)  Specific Information.  ELRs can use TG 22-99-1 (with change 1) for information in inquiry access.  Also, see [Part 6: Chapter 1 - General](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000076271?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), [Part 7: Chapter 1 - General](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073664?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) and [M22-4 Part 8: Chapter 1 - (Chapter 1606 Provisions)](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073835?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) for ELR instructions.

**e.**  **Microsoft Applications**

(1)  Microsoft Word.  RPOs use Word files to produce local letters and other documents. 

(2)  Microsoft Excel.  RPOs use a limited number of Excel files (spreadsheets) in education processing.  An example is keeping track of the 5 month entitlement free period for chapter 35 claimants.  (See [Part 7: Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073737?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&). Section 4.12)

(3)  For additional information, see your RPO Training coordinator.

**f.**  **Personal Information Exchange System** 

(1)  PIES (Personal Information Exchange System) provides RPOs with the ability to electronically request and receive information directly from NPRC (National Personnel Records Center) in St. Louis, MO.  PIES replaced the manual development for service records and other service information previously requested from BDN's 201 and 202 screens. 

(2)  PIES does the following:

(a)  Provides direct access to NPRC's on-line military personnel record registry system through the AAC. 

(b)  Forwards information requests automatically to NPRC upon having a records match. 

(c)  Provides electronic response from NPRC when appropriate (i. e., service verification). 

(d)  Eliminates duplicate and multiple requests for the same information. 

(e)  Monitors information request status and has report capability for stations.

(3)  For more information, consult the PIES Users Guide which should be available in the Adjudication Division.

**g.**  **Personal Computer Generated Letters** 

(1)  PCGL (Personal Computer Generated Letters) is a system  that allows RPOs with the ability to specifically tailor claimant notification letters. 

(2)  For additional information, review TG 22-99-3, PCGL User Guide.

**h.**  **Veterans Appeals Control and Locator System**

(1)  VACOLS (Veterans Appeals Control and Locator System) is a unified tracking system for appeals covering all stages of an appeal from the receipt of a Notice of Disagreement through final disposition by the Board of Veterans Appeals or the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims.

(2)  For additional information, review [M21-1, part II, chapter 7](http://vbaw.vba.va.gov/bl/21/publicat/Manuals/Part2/207.htm) (change 37). 

**i.**  **VBA Work-Study Management System**

(1)  The VBA Work-Study Management System fully automates the processing of work-study applications, contracts, and time cards.  It generates appropriate letters, contracts, time cards, claim folder flash and control registers.  It allows RPOs to generate numerous reports to effectively manage the work-study program.

(2)  For additional information, send [e-mail](mailto:VAVBAWAS/CO/224B?subject=Part%202%20Chapter%201%20-%20VBA%20Work-Study%20Management%20System) to "VAVBAWAS/CO/224B".]