# Part 4: Chapter 12 - Out-of-System Award Processing

**Part 4: Chapter 12 - Out-of-System Award Processing**

See [Policy Advisory - New Out of System (OOS) Form](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000072918?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) dated July 18, 2007

[12.01 General](#1201)  
[12.02 Out-of-System Processing - Overview](#1202)  
[12.03 Out-of-System Processing for Chapter 30](#1203)  
[12.04 Out-of-System Processing for Chapter 32](#1204)  
[12.05 Out-of-System Processing for Chapter 35](#1205)  
[12.06 Out-of-System Processing for Chapter 1606](#1206)  
[12.07 Out-of-System Processing for Section 901](#1207)  
[12.08 Out-of-System Processing for the Antiterrorism Act](#1208)  
[12.09 Authorization Forms Used for Out-of-System Education Awards](#1209)  
[12.10 Preparation of VA Form 22-1992](#1210)  
[12.11 Preparation of VA Form 22-1997](#1211)  
[12.12 Preparation of VA Form 22-8046](#1212)  
[12.13 Completion of Optional Form 41](#1213)  
[12.14 Coordination of Out-of-System Award Actions](#1214)  
  
**Figures**  
[12.01 Methods Used for Preparing Awards](#f1201)  
[12.02 Representation of Completed VA Form 22-1992 Chapter 32 On-the-Job Training](#f1202)  
[12.03 Representation of Completed VA Form 22-1992 Chapter 1606 Flight Training](#f1203)  
[12.04 Representation of Completed VA Form 22-1992 Chapter 32 Correspondence Training](#f1204)  
[12.05 Representation of Completed VA Form 22-1997 Chapter 1606 Flight Training](#f1205)  
[12.06 Representation of Completed VA Form 22-1997 Chapter 1606 Correspondence Training](#f1206)  
[12.07 Representation of Completed VA Form 22-1997 Chapter 1606 On-the-Job Training](#f1207)  
[12.08 Representation of Completed VA Form 22-1997 Chapter 30 Accrued Award](#f1208)  
[12.09 Representation of Completed VA Form 22-1997 Chapter 35 Dropped Priors](#f1209)  
[12.10 Representation of Completed VA Form 22-1997 Chapter 1606 Coast Guard](#f1210)  
[12.11 Representation of Completed VA Form 22-1997 Section 901](#f1211)  
[12.12 Representation of Completed VA Form 22-1997 Chapter 32 Incarceration](#f1212)  
[12.13 Representation of Completed VA Form 22-8046 Chapter 1606 Coast Guard](#f1213)  
[12.14 Representation of Optional Form 41](#f1214)

 

**12.01  GENERAL**

---

The Education Division processes most education awards using the BDN (Benefit Delivery Network) system described in pts. V, VI, VII and TG (Training Guide) 22-99-5 (The Chapter 1606 User Guide) or the chapter 30 PC system described in [Part 05, Chapter 30. Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000076293?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&),  subchapter IV.  Out-of-system award processing refers to awards prepared outside these systems on the VA Forms specified in paragraphs [12.10 through 12.13](#1210). 

***NOTE 1:**  Chapter 35 actions that use CHAIRS (Chapter 35 Alternate Replacement System) are not considered out-of-system awards although an operator enters these transactions in a different format.  (See TG 22-99-2.)  BDN maintains the award data.*

***NOTE 2:**  The figures in this chapter are samples of various out-of-system awards.  In many cases, the figure could apply to more than one benefit.*

***NOTE 3:**  Stations should always ensure proper coordination of out-of-system awards.  For example, RPOs (Regional Processing Centers) should ensure that the ELR (Education Liaison Representative) with jurisdiction over a particular school] receives proper notice of out-of-system awards for compliance survey or other purposes.  (See[par. 12.14.](#1214))*

**12.02  [OUT-OF-SYSTEM PROCESSING - OVERVIEW]**

---

See [figure 12.01](#f1201) to determine whether out-of-system award processing is required.  Out-of-system processing is sometimes required in the following situations: 

**a.  Accrued.**  Accrued benefits are payable for any education benefits due and unpaid to a deceased claimant at the time of death.  (See par. 11.27.)  Use out-of-system processing when required by that paragraph. 

**b.  Incarcerated.**  Reduce all benefits, except section 901, per instructions in paragraph 13.13.  Use out-of-system processing when required by that paragraph. 

**c.  Dropped Priors.**  All BDN education benefit systems will "drop" priors award lines as detailed in paragraph 13.19.  A BDN master record can only contain a specified number of prior award segments.  When that number is reached, BDN] eliminates or "drops" the earliest date when an operator submits a current or future date.  The number of prior award segments vary by benefit.  If an operator needs to process a new award for an effective date before the earliest date in the master record, prepare an out-of-system award.

|  | **CH 30** | **CH 32** | **CH 35** | **CH [1606** | **SEC 901** | **ANTI TERRORISM ACT** |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
Figure 12.01. Methods Used For Preparing Awards]

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **TYPE OF AWARD** |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **ACCRUED** | [1997 | BDN | BDN | 1997 | 1997 | 1997 |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **DROPPED PRIORS** | 1997 | 1997 | 1997 | 1997 | N/A | N/A |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **INCARCERATED** | BDN | 1997 | BDN | BDN | N/A | 1997 |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **CORRESPONDENCE** | PC | 1997 | BDN | 1997 | N/A | 1997 |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **HIGH SCHOOL** | N/A | BDN/  1997\* | BDN | N/A | N/A | 1997 |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **FLIGHT** | PC | 1997 | N/A | 1997 | N/A | N/A |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **APPRENTICESHIP/OJT** | PC | 1997 | BDN | 1997 | N/A | 1997 |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **COAST GUARD CASES** | BDN | BDN | N/A | 1997 | N/A | N/A |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| **OTHER AWARDS** | BDN | BDN | BDN | BDN | 1997 | 1997 |
| **(IHL, NCD)** |  |  |  |  |  |  |

**Explanation of symbols:**

           **1997** - Out-of-System Award Forms Required

           **N/A** - Not Applicable

           **PC**  - Chapter 30 PC System

           **BDN** - BDN System

        \*  VAF 22-1997 used only if claimant elects payment of tuition and fees. 

              Use BDN otherwise.

**Figure 12.01.  Methods Used For Preparing Awards]**

***NOTE:**  This figure does not show where the different out-of-system benefit awards are sent for processing.]*

**12.03  OUT-OF-SYSTEM PROCESSING FOR CHAPTER 30**

---

Chapter 30 benefits are processed using BDN, Benefits Manager, and the chapter 30 PC system, except as shown in [Figure 12.02](#1202).  

[M22-4: Part 05, Chapter 30 - Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000076293?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), paragraphs 4.03 and 4.04 have additional references for chapter 30 out-of-system processing.

[M22-4: Part 7, Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues 4.25](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073737/Part-7-Chapter-4-Award-Processing-and-Other-Authorization-Issues#%23Top)  has additional references for out-of-system processing for OJT and Apprenticeship programs.

[M22-4: Part 7, Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues 4.26](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073737/Part-7-Chapter-4-Award-Processing-and-Other-Authorization-Issues#%23Top)  has additional references for out-of-system processing for Correspondence courses.

 

**12.04  OUT-OF-SYSTEM PROCESSING FOR CHAPTER 32**

---

[Chapter 32 and section 903 benefits are processed using BDN, except as shown in [Figure 12.02](#1202). [Part 6: Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073576?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&) has additional references for chapter 32 out-of-system processing.]

**12.05  OUT-OF-SYSTEM PROCESSING FOR CHAPTER 35**

---

Chapter 35 benefits are processed using BDN and Benefits Manager except as shown in [Figure 12.02.](#1202)

[M22-4: Part 7, Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues 4.25](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073737/Part-7-Chapter-4-Award-Processing-and-Other-Authorization-Issues#%23Top)  has additional references for out-of-system processing for OJT and Apprenticeship programs.

[M22-4: Part 7, Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues 4.26](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073737/Part-7-Chapter-4-Award-Processing-and-Other-Authorization-Issues#%23Top)  has additional references for out-of-system processing for Correspondence courses.

**12.06  OUT-OF-SYSTEM PROCESSING FOR CHAPTER 1606**

---

Chapter 1606 benefits are processed using BDN and Benefits Manager except as shown in [Figure 12.02.](#1202) 

[Part 8: Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000075562?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), subchapter III has additional references for chapter 1606 out-of-system processing.

[M22-4: Part 7, Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues 4.25](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073737/Part-7-Chapter-4-Award-Processing-and-Other-Authorization-Issues#%23Top)  has additional references for out-of-system processing for OJT and Apprenticeship programs.

[M22-4: Part 7, Chapter 4 - Award Processing and Other Authorization Issues 4.26](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000073737/Part-7-Chapter-4-Award-Processing-and-Other-Authorization-Issues#%23Top)  has additional references for out-of-system processing for Correspondence courses.

**12.07  OUT-OF-SYSTEM PROCESSING FOR SECTION 901**

---

        Section 901 benefits are processed totally out-of-system.  The Waco RO (Regional office) uses a personal computer system to process this benefit.  (See [Part 3: Chapter 11 - Section 901](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073555?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&))

**12.08  OUT-OF-SYSTEM PROCESSING FOR THE ANTITERRORISM ACT**

---

Benefits for the antiterrorism act are processed entirely out-of-system.  (See [Part 3: Chapter 12 - The Antiterrorism Act](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073280?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&))

**12.09  AUTHORIZATION FORMS USED FOR OUT-OF-SYSTEM EDUCATION AWARDS**

---

**a.**  Use the following VA forms:

(1)  VA Form 22-1992, Authorization for Certificate of Eligibility or Disallowance.  [(See figs. [12.02 through 12.04.](#f1204))

***NOTE:** For disallowance processing, see*[Part 3: Chapter 9 - Certificates of Eligibility and Disallowances](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000076203?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)*.*

(2)  VA Form 22-1997, Education Award.  (See [figs. 12.05 through 12.12](#f1205).)

(3)  VA Form 22-8046 Payment Notice (Stop-Suspend-Resume).  (See figs. [12.13](#f1213).)

(4)  OF (Optional Form) 41, Routing and Transmittal Sheet.  (See fig. [12.14](#f1214).)

**b.** For changes of address when no other award action is necessary, send VA Form 572, Request for Change of Address, Cancellation of Direct Deposit, with a cover transmittal (OF 41) to the processing office which handles the out-of-system award action.  Alternatively, fax a copy of the VA Form 572 to the processing office.

***NOTE:** Only chapter 30 currently has direct deposit.]*

**c**.  Original submissions are packages (i.e., 22-1992 and 22-1997).  Supplemental submissions are usually individual forms (i.e., 22-1997, 21-8046, or VA Form 572 for change of addresses only).   

**12.10  PREPARATION OF VA FORM 22-1992**

---

**a.  General.**  Complete VA Form 22-1992, in triplicate, for all original out-of-system awards and when there is a change in the course or school data previously submitted.  Send the original to the Finance activity (or other activity as elsewhere specified) for processing and payment.  File one copy in the claimant's folder.  Send the second copy to the ELR at the RO with jurisdiction over the claimant's school.

**b.  Entries on VA Form 22-1992.**  Complete the items on VA Form 22-1992 as follows:

***NOTE:** Exceptions to these procedures are specified in other parts of this manual.  The following items pertain to the March 1991 version of VA Form 22-1992.*

(1)  Type of Action (item 1):  [Check the Certificate block when preparing a certificate of eligibility.  Do not check the Disallowance block, as RPOs do not have to complete this form to disallow a claim.  See [Part 3: Chapter 9 - Certificates of Eligibility and Disallowances](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000076203?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), par. 9.09.]

(2)  Type of Claim (item 2):  Check the correct preprinted entry.  If none of the preprinted entries applies, cross out an entry and write in the correct benefit.

(3)  File Number (item 3):  If the individual's social security number is the file number, enter the nine-digit number.  If he or she has an eight-digit claim number as the file number, leave the first space blank and enter the number.

(4)  Name and Address of Applicant (item 4A):  Enter the applicant's name and address to include the five-digit ZIP Code.  Enter the name on the first address line in all cases, unless the payee has a fiduciary.  If the payee has a fiduciary, see M21-1, part V, par. 13.05c.  If the applicant's name exceeds the first address line, enter a "reduced name."  This "reduced name" consists of the applicant's first initial, second initial (if a second initial exists), and the last name.  The "reduced name" must not exceed 20 positions.  The 20 positions include the space(s) between the initial(s) and the surname.  Always use the two-character abbreviation for the state.  Skip two spaces and enter the ZIP Code after the state code abbreviation.  If there is insufficient space on the address line with the two-character state code, enter the ZIP code on the following line, indented two spaces.  Always enter "OUT-OF-SYSTEM AWARD" and "CHAPTER   " on the last two lines.

(5)  Address for Input (item 4B):

(a)  Check block 1 - "Yes" to establish an address or if there is a new address.

(b)  Check block 2 - "No" if there is no change in the address.

(6)  Veteran's Name (item 5):  Enter the first and second initials and the first five letters of the individual's surname.  If the person has no middle initial, leave the second space blank.  If the surname is shorter than five letters, enter the complete surname and leave the remaining space(s) blank.

(7)  Name of Applicant (Other than Veteran) (item 6):  Complete this item if the applicant is an eligible person under chapter 35.  Enter the first and second initials and the first five letters of the surname of the eligible person.  If the eligible person has no middle initial, leave the second space blank.  If the surname is shorter than five letters, enter the complete surname and leave the remaining space(s) blank.

(8)  Entitlement Credit (item 7):  Enter the original net entitlement for an original award.  Enter the remaining entitlement for a supplemental certificate.  Check BDN or manually compute remaining entitlement.

(9)  Delimiting Date (item 8):  Enter the first date on which educational assistance may not be paid to the claimant.  Enter "ON DUTY" for students who are currently on active duty.

(10)  Delimiting Computation Date (item 9):  Leave blank.

(11)  Type of Certificate (item 10): 

(a)  Check block 1 - Original, for an original VA Form 22-1992 if full entitlement is known or for supplemental VA Form 22-1992 when block 4 - Temporary was checked on a previous C/E and now the claimant's full entitlement has been determined.

***NOTE:**  Whenever adjusting (increasing or decreasing) original entitlement for out-of-system awards, clearly annotate the changed entitlement for the Finance activity.  Annotate the form with "NOTE: CHANGED ORIGINAL ENTITLEMENT."*

(b)  Check block 3 - Supplemental, for a supplemental VA Form 22-1992 if there is a change in a school or program.

(c)  Check block 4 - Temporary, *ONLY* when eligibility is established but the full amount of entitlement cannot be determined.  If "temporary" is checked, entitlement should be limited to a *maximum* of 12 months.

(12)  Name and Address of School or Training Establishment (item 11A):  Enter the name and address of the school or training establishment.

(13)  School Code (item 11B):  Enter the eight-digit code assigned to the facility in which the student is enrolled.  Consult the approval records for the facility code.  Ensure that this code is correct.

(14)  Final Objective and Code (item 12):  Enter the name of the final objective.  Also, enter the appropriate three-digit code which identifies the claimant's final objective.  For example, if the final objective is mechanical drafting, the proper code is 323.  (See [Part 2: Chapter 9- Code Tables](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073086?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), pars. 9.32 and 9.33.)

(15)  Approved Courses (item 13):  Enter the name of the approved course or courses.

(16)  Limitation on Certificate (item 14):  Leave blank.

(17)  Type of Training for Current Course (item 15):  Check one block.

(18)  Special Eligibility Indicator (item 16):  Check as appropriate.  (SCD means service-connected disability.)

(19)  Not on Duty (38 C.F.R. 3.15) (item 17):  Enter if appropriate for chapter 30 and 32, and section 903 cases. 

(20)  Prior VA Training (item 18):  For original VA Forms 22-1992, enter the appropriate numeric code for the type of prior training followed by the months and days of prior training.  Do not enter any information when the applicant had no training under other VA laws.

(21)  Reasons For Disallowance (item 19):  Leave blank.

(22)  Power of Attorney (item 20):  Enter the appropriate two-digit code if notice to recognize the power of attorney is of record.  (See pt. II, par. 9.17.)

(23)  Signature and Date blocks (items 21A, 21B, 22A and 22B):  The individual or individuals preparing and authorizing VA Form 22-1992 must sign and date it.*Awards where two signatures are required are listed in* [Part 3: Chapter 1 - Administrative Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073486?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)*, par. 1.32.*

*(24)  RO No. (item 23):  Enter the appropriate RPO number.]  (See* [Part 2: Chapter 9- Code Tables](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073086?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)*, par. 9.21.)*

**12.11  PREPARATION OF VA FORM 22-1997**

---

**a.** Prepare VA Form 22-1997 in triplicate.  The original document is for the appropriate Finance activity.  File one copy in the claimant's folder.  Send the second copy to the ELR at the RO with jurisdiction over the claimant's school.

**b.** Complete this form in accordance with the following procedures:

***NOTE:** The following items are on the April, 1991 edition of VA Form 22-1997.*

(1)  Copy to (item 1):

(a)  If a fiduciary has been appointed for the payee, check the block and insert the RO number of the Fiduciary & Field Examination activity, or Field Section at the Veterans Services Center with jurisdiction.

(b)  Check the block but leave the RO number blank if a copy of the award is being prepared for other reasons.  Indicate where the copy is being forwarded: e.g., parent claims folder - RO St. Petersburg, FL.   

(2)  File Number (item 2):  If the [individual's social security number is the file number, enter the nine-digit number.  If he or she has an eight-digit claim number as the file number, leave the first space blank and enter the number.

(3)  Payee No. (item 3):  Enter the appropriate payee number.  (See  [Part 2: Chapter 9- Code Tables](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073086?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), par. 9.12.)

(4)  R.O. No. (item 4):  Enter the appropriate RPO number.  (See  [Part 2: Chapter 9- Code Tables](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073086?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), par. 9.21.)

(5)  Power of Attorney (item 5):  Enter the appropriate two-digit code if notice to recognize the power of attorney is of record.  (See   [Part 2: Chapter 9- Code Tables](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073086?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), par. 9.17.)

(6)  Veteran's Social Security Number (item 6):  Complete this item only if the file number is not the veteran's, serviceperson's, or reservist's social security number.  Enter the nine-digit number.

(7)  Initials and Surname of Veteran (item 7):  Enter the first and second initials and the first five letters of the individual's surname.  If the person has no middle initial, leave the second space blank.  If the surname is shorter than five letters, enter the complete surname and leave the remaining space(s) blank.  Also, enter this item for chapter 35 claimants.

(8)  Name and Address (item 8A):  See subparagraph 12.10b(4).

(9)  New Address (item 8B):

(a)  Check block 1 - "Yes" if there is a new address.

(b)  Check block 2 - "No" if there is no change in the address.

(10)  Initials and Surname of Person Entitled (other than veteran, serviceperson, or reservist) (item 9):  Enter the first and second initials and the first five letters of the surname of the eligible person under chapter 35.  If the eligible person has no middle initial, leave the second space blank.  If the surname is shorter than five letters, enter the complete surname and leave the remaining space(s) blank.

(11)  Social Security Number for Person Entitled (item 10):  Enter the claimant's nine-digit social security number if the claimant is other than the person on whom eligibility is based.

(12)  Prior Net Award Data (item 11):  Enter monthly rates and effective dates if the award adjusts a prior award period.  Also, enter monthly rates and effective dates on accrued awards and on awards for dropped priors for periods of training dropped from the BDN master record.  

(13)  Award Data (item 12):  This is not an entry block but refers to items 12A through 12K.

(14)  Change Reason (item 12A):  Enter the applicable reason code on the first and each subsequent award line used.  (See  [Part 2: Chapter 9- Code Tables](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073086?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), par. 9.14.)

(15)  Dependency (items 12B & C):  For veterans under chapter 30, category II, enter the applicable two-digit dependency code in item 12B.  Leave item 12C blank.  Leave both items blank for all other benefits.  (See  [Part 2: Chapter 9- Code Tables](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073086?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), par. 9.04.)

(16)  Monthly Rate or Rate per Lesson (item 12D):  Enter the appropriate monthly rate according to the benefit being awarded.  See chapter 1 of the different benefit parts of this manual (pts. V, VI, VII, or VIII).

(a)  Institutional, Farm Cooperative, Apprenticeship, or On-the-Job Training.  Enter the appropriate rate according to the benefit being awarded based on the correct dependency, training time, and type training.  Enter NONE to reflect a no-rate period or termination.

(b)  Correspondence Awards.  Enter the proper rate per lesson based on the lowest time payment plan as contained in the approval file or the actual cost of the course, whichever is less.  See [Part 4: Chapter 2 - Flight and Correspondence Training](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073476?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), and the different benefit parts of this manual (pts. V, VI, VII, or VIII) for factors affecting the reimbursement rate.

***NOTE:**  Enter the 100% correspondence course rate.  However, the Finance activity pays 55% of this rate for all* *benefits other than chapter 32.  The Finance activity pays the entire (100%) rate for chapter 32 correspondence awards.*

(c)  Flight Awards.  Enter the full-time institutional rate (including the additional amounts for kickers and dependents in chapter 30 cases) on the first award line.  Also, see subparagraph c for additional flight award preparation procedures when claimants incur charges for instructions prior to the effective date of the award, or when the school reports at the time the award is authorized that the student completed part or all flight instruction and the adjudicator wants to combine the two actions of "award" and "monthly certification of flight training."  See part IV, chapter 2 and chapter 4 of the different benefit parts of this manual (pts. V, VI, or VIII) for flight award preparation and factors affecting the reimbursement rate.

(17)  Effective Date (item 12E):  Enter the correct effective date based on VA Form 22-1999, Enrollment Certification, or other form.  Enter the appropriate effective date (month, day and year) followed by the effective date(s) for any changes, and the termination date.  Enter the numeric code for the month-day-year; e.g., enter 10-15-99 for October 15, 1999.  Check dates to ensure that they are in sequential order before releasing the document.  For correspondence and flight awards, enter the beginning date and any legislative effective dates; do not enter any termination date.

(18)  Training Time (item 12F):  Enter the correct one-digit training time code.  (See  [Part 2: Chapter 9- Code Tables](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073086?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), par. 9.23.)

(19)  Entitlement Code (item 12G):  Enter the appropriate two-digit entitlement code, except for Antiterrorism cases.  Leave this item blank in Antiterrorism cases.  (See  [Part 2: Chapter 9- Code Tables](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073086?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), par. 9.07.)

(20)  Type Hours (items 12H & I):  Enter the appropriate alpha character for the type of hours followed by the number of hours from VA Form 22-1999 or other form.  For correspondence and flight awards, leave blank.  (See  [Part 2: Chapter 9- Code Tables](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073086?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), par. 9.27.)

(21)  Days Per Week (item 12J):  Enter the number of days per week of attendance for type training K and G only.  Leave blank in all other cases. 

(22)  Entitlement Charge (item 12K):  For chapter 35 only, enter the appropriate single-digit entitlement charge code (0 through 4) if deficiency-type hours are shown on VA Form 22-1999 or other form.  (See  [Part 2: Chapter 9- Code Tables](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073086?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), par. 9.06, for entitlement charge codes.)

(23)  Remarks (item 13):  Show remarks as necessary.

(24)  Veteran's Service (item 14):  Check one block representing the service that entitles the payee to chapter 35 benefits.  Complete this item only on original awards.

(25)  Excess Charge (SRT) 38 C.F.R. 21.3333 (item 15):  Check "YES" if a chapter 35 SRT (Special Restorative Training) case has excess charges (charges that exceed the full-time rate).  Check "NO" if an SRT case does not have excess charges.

(26)  Total Charges (item 16):  Enter total tuition and fees for the term or other enrollment period, for all chapter 30 inservice cases, chapters 30 and 35 cases with less than half-time training, cases where the claimant is incarcerated, and chapter 32 high school cases where the veteran elects tuition and fees.  If benefits are awarded for two or more enrollment periods, enter the combined total charges.  For correspondence cases, enter the actual total approved charges for the course (lessons authorized X rate per lesson = total charges).  For flight cases, enter total charges approved for the current course.

(27)  Number of Correspondence Lessons (item 17):  Complete only if the claimant is pursuing a correspondence course.  Enter the total number of correspondence lessons authorized.  This entry for correspondence courses *excludes* the number of lessons for which the claimant has been granted credit, but *includes* the number of lessons serviced before the effective date.  Enter any non-reimbursable lessons in "remarks".

(28)  Course Code (Current) (item 18):  Enter the appropriate three-digit course code on all original awards.  Also, enter the appropriate three-digit course code on all supplemental awards, if changed.

(29)  Enrollment Period (Lump-Sum Indicator) (item 19):

(a)  Complete only on original and reentrance awards if lump-sum payment is an issue (i.e., chapter 30 and 35 cases where training is less than 1/2 time, and chapter 32 high school cases if the rate is based on tuition and fees).

(b)  Check block 1 if the school operates on a term basis and a lump-sum payment should be issued.

(c)  Check block 5 if the school operates on a year-round basis and monthly payments should be issued.  Check block 5 for an award which authorizes a combination of half-time or greater training with less than half-time training.

(30)  Extended Entitlement Indicator (item 20):  Check one of the following blocks, if entitlement can be extended:

(a)  Block 1 - SEMESTER.  Check this block if the school operates on a semester basis, the payee will exhaust his or her entitlement during the semester, and the payee is entitled to an extension of entitlement to the end of the semester.

(b)  Block 2 - QUARTER.  Check this block if the school operates on a quarter basis, the payee will exhaust his or her entitlement during the quarter, and the payee is entitled to an extension of entitlement to the end of the quarter.

(c)  Block 3 - OTHER.  Check this block if the school operates on other than a semester or quarter basis, the payee will exhaust his or her entitlement during the term, and the payee is entitled to an extension of entitlement to the end of the term.  Also, check block 3-OTHER if the student's entitlement will be exhausted after completing more than half of a correspondence, NCD (Non-College Degree) course not organized on a term basis, or a flight training course.

(d)  Block 5-9 MONTHS (Undergraduate).  Always leave blank. 

(31)  Children Data (item 21):  Complete for category II chapter 30 cases only.  Complete the child birth segment only for children not established on a previous award.  Enter the appropriate one-digit action code, sex code, birth date, and one-digit status code.  If more than eight children are established, enter the number of children in excess of eight in "Number of Children Over 8."

(32)  Date of Claim (item 22):  Enter the date (month, day and year) of receipt of the application in VA or U. S. embassy or consulate, whichever is earlier. 

(33)  Adjudicator and Authorizer Signature and Date Blocks (items 23A, 23B, 24A and 24B):  The individual or individuals preparing and authorizing the award must sign and date it.  *Awards where two signatures are required are listed in*[Part 3: Chapter 1 - Administrative Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073486?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)*, par. 1.32.*

**c**.  For flight cases, complete this form in accordance with the following additional procedures, where appropriate:

(1)  If a student incurs charges for instruction before the effective date of the award, the amount is not reimbursable and will be shown on the next available award line as follows:

(a)  Change Reason (item 12A):  Enter reason code 59 (paid by student).

(b)  Monthly Rate (item 12D):  Enter the total amount of the charges paid for instruction before the effective date.

(c)  Effective Date (item 12E):  Enter "PD-BY-ST" (paid by student).

(d)  Remarks (item 13):  Enter the equivalent number of hours of instruction for  the type of training paid by the student; for example, 10 hours dual instruction.

(2)  For chapter 30 cases, if the student has completed more than one-half of the course when the entitlement is exhausted, the student is entitled to an extension of 84 days.  To compute the amount of the extension, divide the basic full-time monthly rate by 30.  Multiply the resulting amount by 84 and round off to the nearest dollar.

***NOTE*:** *For chapter 30, do not include kickers.  (See* [PART 01, GENERAL. CHAPTER 02, DEFINITIONS](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000063717?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)*, for definition of "kicker.")*

EXAMPLE: A veteran has completed more than one-half of a flight course when she exhausts her entitlement on July 1, 2000.  Her full-time monthly rate for chapter 1606 as of October 1, 1999 is $255.  Compute the amount of the extension as follows:

$ 255/ 30 = $8.50 X 84 = $ 714]

(3)  If a flight school reports at the time of award authorization that a student completed all or some flight instruction, it is possible to combine the "award" and "monthly certification of flight training" actions.  This expedites the payment of educational assistance for the cost of flight instruction reported as completed at the time of enrollment processing.  If the charges are payable at the time the award is processed, complete the next available award line as follows:

(a)  Change Reason (item 12A):  Enter reason code 78 (reimburse flight charges to DLC (Date Last Certified) at 60 percent and continue in running award status); enter reason code 69 (reimburse flight charges to DLC at 60 percent and terminate) to pay the charges and stop the award.

(b)  Monthly Rate (item 12D):  Enter the total charges for flight instruction incurred through DLC or termination date.

(c)  Effective Date (item 12E):  Enter the date through which the charges are certified.

(4)  To amend a hard-copy flight award, prepare VA Form 22-1997 in accordance with this subparagraph.

**12.12  PREPARATION OF VA FORM 22-8046**

---

**a**.  Prepare VA Form [22-8046 in triplicate to stop, suspend, or resume an out-of-system record.  The original document is for the appropriate Finance activity.  File one copy in the claimant's folder.  Send the second copy to the ELR at the RO with jurisdiction over the claimant's school.

**b**.  The following items pertain to the November 1995 version of VA Form 22-8046.  Complete the form in accordance with the following procedures:

(1)  Type of Award (item 1):  Check the one appropriate block. If none of the preprinted entries applies, place the correct benefit in the "other" block.

(2)  File Number (item 2):  Enter the VA file number.  If the claimant's social security number is the file number, enter the nine-digit number.  If the claimant has an eight-digit claim number as the file number, leave the first space blank and enter the number.

(3)  Payee No. (item 3):  Enter the appropriate payee number.  (See  [Part 2: Chapter 9- Code Tables](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073086?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), par. 9.12.)

(4)  Action Codes (item 4): 

(a)  Check block A (STOP) for a stop action.  Enter the termination reason code from part II, paragraph 9.14, followed by the effective date of no-pay status.

(b)  Check block B (Suspend) to temporarily prevent the issuance of payment.  Enter the suspension reason code from part  [Part 2: Chapter 9- Code Tables](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073086?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), paragraph 9.14.

        (c)  Check block C (Resume) to resume benefits, after suspension, without any adjustment.

(5)  Power of Attorney (item 5):  Enter the appropriate two-digit code if notice to recognize the power of attorney is of record.  (See  [Part 2: Chapter 9- Code Tables](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073086?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), par. 9.17.)

(6)  Name of Veteran (item 6):  Enter the name of the veteran (chapter 35 only).

(7)  Name of Person Entitled (item 7):  Enter the first and second initials and the first five letters of the entitled person's surname.  If the person has no middle initial, leave the second space blank.  If the surname is shorter than five letters, enter the complete surname and leave the remaining space(s) blank.

(8)  Name and Address of Applicant (item 8):

(a)  Check block 1 - "Yes" if there is a new address.

(b)  Check block 2 - "No" if there is no change in the address.

(c)  See paragraph 12.11 for name and address procedures.  For out-of-system stop actions, enter the legend "OUT-OF-SYSTEM STOP - CHAPTER   " below the address.  For out-of-system suspend actions, enter the legend "OUT-OF-SYSTEM SUSPEND - CHAPTER   " below the address.

(9)  Remarks (item 9):  Show remarks as necessary.

(10)  Preparing Office (item 10):  Check the division preparing the form.

(11)  Copy To (item 11):  Check the ELR block or the "other" block to show where a copy of the form is being sent.

(12)  Prepared By (item 12):  The signature of the person preparing the form.

(13)  Date (item 13):  The date that the person prepared the form.

(14)  Approved By (item 14):  The signature of the person approving the form.

***NOTE:** Awards where two signatures are required are listed in*[Part 3: Chapter 1 - Administrative Issues](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073486?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&)*, par. 1.32.*

(15)  Date (item 15):  The date that the person authorized the form.

(16)  R.O. No. (item 16):  Enter the appropriate RPO number.]  (See  [Part 2: Chapter 9- Code Tables](https://eg5813aprl-int-nlb.egainstz.cloud/system/ws/v11/ss/article/554400000073086?portalId=554400000001018&usertype=customer&\$lang=en-us&), par. 9.21.)

**12.13  COMPLETION OF OPTIONAL FORM 41**

---

**a.  Use of Optional Form 41 in Out-of-System Awards.**  Complete [OF 41](http://www.gsa.gov/Forms/TrackForm/32691) as a cover referral for all out-of-system awards when sending a copy of the award to another office.  Use OF 41 to send [VA Form 572](http://www.vba.va.gov/pubs/forms/VBA-20-572-ARE.pdf) for a change of address only when the award does not have to be changed.  Annotate what items were sent, to whom sent, the date sent, and the initials of the individual sending the items.  The transmittal number shown on [figure 12.14] is only a suggestion as to how stations could keep a record of documents submitted to other offices.  It is similar to the batch number that field stations used when previously submitting documents to a different office for processing.

**b.  Entries on OF 41**.  Complete the items on OF 41 as follows:

(1)  To (items 1-5):  Enter the address of the activity or office to which the out-of-system award is being sent.

(2)  Referral Reason (item under item 5 ):  Mark as many blocks as appropriate.  If the preprinted entry is not shown, cross out an entry and write in the correct information.

(3)  Remarks:  State what items are being sent, and the reason that they are being sent (e.g., VA Form 572 attached for updating out-of-system award address). 

(4)  From (Name, org. symbol, Agency/Post):  State what office is sending the item. 

(5)  Room No.-Bldg:  Leave blank. 

(6)  Phone No.:  Insert the FTS phone number (to include commercial area code) when sending the OF 41 to another RO or Hines BDC (Benefits Delivery Center).  Provide the extension only when sending the OF 41 to another function within the same RO.

**12.14  COORDINATION OF OUT-OF-SYSTEM AWARD ACTIONS**

---

To ensure proper coordination, [the Education Division should notify the ELR, at the RO with jurisdiction over the school, regarding all out-of-system awards.  ELRs should have this information to properly conduct compliance surveys and for other unspecified reasons such as resolving inquiries concerning the payment of reporting fees.

**a.** When notifying the ELR of an out-of-system case, the Education Division should send the ELR a package consisting of a copy of the OF 41 and a copy of the out-of-system award. 

**b.**  The Education Division should prepare this package for all original out-of-system awards and for each out-of-system reentrance award involving a change in place of training or change of program.  Annotate the award retained in the claimant's  folder to show that a package was sent to the ELR and to specify the date it was sent.

**c.**  If the ELR reports that the out-of-system claimant did not train as indicated on the enrollment certification(s) in file, the Education Division] should prepare an amended award to reflect the correct enrollment data.

---

| **Department of Veterans Affairs** |
| --- |
Authorization for certificate of eligibility or disallowance

| AUTHORIZATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF ELIGIBILITY OR DISALLOWANCE | | | | | | | | | | | |
| 1.  Type of Action   X         Certificate        Disallowance | | 2.  Type of Claim               CH 106 Reservist      CH 30 Serviceman          X  CH 32 Veteran      CH 30 Veteran         CH 32 Serviceperson | | | | | | | 3.  File Number        279 99 9999 | | |
| 4A.  Name and Address of Applicant | | | | | | | 4B.  Address For Input | | | | |
| JERRY G SEACAT | | | | | | | X     YES               NO | | | | |
| 3636 BROAD ST | | | | | | | 5.  Vet Stub Name   J C SEACA | | | | |
| CINCINNATI, OH  45236 | | | | | | | 6.  Payee's Stub Name | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | 7.  Entitlement Credit   27/$8100 | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | 8.  DD  02-25-08 | | | 9.  DD Comp Date | |
| OUT-OF-SYSTEM AWARD  CHAPTER 32 | | | | | | | 10.  Type of Certificate    X          1. - Original                 3. - Supplemental                 4. - Temporary | | | | |
| 11A.   School  Perry Correctional Institute  Rt. 3, Box 4310  Pelzer, SC  29669 | | | | 12.  Final Objective  Electrician  Code 377 | | | 13.  Approved Courses  Electrician | | | | |
| 11B.  School Code  1-0-5349-40 | | | | | | 14.  Limitations on Certificate  None              Paragraph/ Information on Reverse | | | | | |
| 15.  Type of Training for Current Code  G | | | | | | 16.  Special Eligibility Indicator  0 | | | | | |
| 17.  Not on Duty | | | | 18.  Prior VA Training | | | | | | | |
| Months | Days | | | Type    Months  Days | | | | | | | |
| 19.  Reasons for Disallowance | | | | | | | | | | | |
| 20.  Power of Attorney | | | | | | | | | | | |
| 21A.  Adjudicator | | | 21B  Date | | 22A.  Authorizer | | | 22B  Date | | | 23 RO NO. |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

**Figure 12.02.  Representation of Completed VA Form 22-1992  
Chapter 32 On-the-Job Training**

---

| **Department of Veterans Affairs** | | | | | | | | | | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
Figure 12.03

| AUTHORIZATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF ELIGIBILITY OR DISALLOWANCE | | | | | | | | | | | |
| 1.  Type of Action   X         Certificate        Disallowance | | 2.  Type of Claim            X  CH 106 Reservist      CH 30 Serviceman             CH 32 Veteran      CH 30 Veteran         CH 32 Serviceperson | | | | | | | 3.  File Number        39 876 543 | | |
| 4A.  Name and Address of Applicant | | | | | | | 4B.  Address For Input | | | | |
| PAUL D LOPEZ | | | | | | | X     YES               NO | | | | |
| 3766 BROADLAWN CIRCLE | | | | | | | 5.  Vet Stub Name   P D LOPEZ | | | | |
| BALTIMORE, MD  212016 | | | | | | | 6.  Payee's Stub Name | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | 7.  Entitlement Credit   36 | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | 8.  DD  03-31-06 | | | 9.  DD Comp Date | |
| OUT-OF-SYSTEM AWARD  CHAPTER 1606 | | | | | | | 10.  Type of Certificate    X          1. - Original                 3. - Supplemental                 4. - Temporary | | | | |
| 11A.   School  Professional Flight Svc Inc.  Maryland Airport  Indian Head MD  20640 | | | | 12.  Final Objective  Commercial Pilot  Code 342 | | | 13.  Approved Courses  Commercial/  Instrument, Multi-Engine  Transport Pilot | | | | |
| 11B.  School Code  2-5-0104-20 | | | | | | 14.  Limitations on Certificate  None              Paragraph/ Information on Reverse | | | | | |
| 15.  Type of Training for Current Code  J | | | | | | 16.  Special Eligibility Indicator  0 | | | | | |
| 17.  Not on Duty | | | | 18.  Prior VA Training | | | | | | | |
| Months | Days | | | Type    Months  Days | | | | | | | |
| 19.  Reasons for Disallowance | | | | | | | | | | | |
| 20.  Power of Attorney | | | | | | | | | | | |
| 21A.  Adjudicator | | | 21B  Date | | 22A.  Authorizer | | | 22B  Date | | | 23 RO NO. |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

**Figure 12.03.  Representation of Completed VA Form 22-1992  
Chapter 1606 Flight Training**

---

Figure 12.04

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **Department of Veterans Affairs** | | | | | | | | | | | |
| AUTHORIZATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF ELIGIBILITY OR DISALLOWANCE | | | | | | | | | | | |
| 1.  Type of Action   X         Certificate        Disallowance | | 2.  Type of Claim               CH 106 Reservist      CH 30 Serviceman         X  CH 32 Veteran      CH 30 Veteran         CH 32 Serviceperson | | | | | | | 3.  File Number        30 956 565 | | |
| 4A.  Name and Address of Applicant | | | | | | | 4B.  Address For Input | | | | |
| LINDA L SCHMIDT | | | | | | | X     YES               NO | | | | |
| 116 GATES DRIVE | | | | | | | 5.  Vet Stub Name   L L SCHMI | | | | |
| NASHVILLE, TN  37201 | | | | | | | 6.  Payee's Stub Name | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | 7.  Entitlement Credit   27/$8100 | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | 8.  DD  04-02-07 | | | 9.  DD Comp Date | |
| OUT-OF-SYSTEM AWARD  CHAPTER 32 | | | | | | | 10.  Type of Certificate    X          1. - Original                 3. - Supplemental                 4. - Temporary | | | | |
| 11A.   School  Harcourt Learning Direct  925 Oak Street.  Scranton PA  18515 | | | | 12.  Final Objective  Computer Programmer  Code 429 | | | 13.  Approved Courses  Computer Programming | | | | |
| 11B.  School Code  2-8-0031-38 | | | | | | 14.  Limitations on Certificate  None              Paragraph/ Information on Reverse | | | | | |
| 15.  Type of Training for Current Code  D | | | | | | 16.  Special Eligibility Indicator  0 | | | | | |
| 17.  Not on Duty | | | | 18.  Prior VA Training | | | | | | | |
| Months | Days | | | Type    Months  Days | | | | | | | |
| 19.  Reasons for Disallowance | | | | | | | | | | | |
| 20.  Power of Attorney | | | | | | | | | | | |
| 21A.  Adjudicator | | | 21B  Date | | 22A.  Authorizer | | | 22B  Date | | | 23 RO NO. |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

**Figure 12.04.  Representation of Completed VA Form 22-1992  
Chapter 32 Correspondence Training**

---

| **Department of Veterans Affairs** | | | | | | | | **EDUCATION AWARD** | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
Figure 12.05

| 1. Copy  (GDN Unit \_\_\_) | | | | | 2.  File Number  39876543 | | | | | | | 3.  Payee  00 | | | | 4.  R. O. No  16 | | | | | | 5.  P O A  Code | | | | | | |
| P O A Name | | | | | 6  Veteran's Social Security Number  456789012 | | | | | | | | | | | | | 7 Initials and Surname of Veteran  P D LOPEZ | | | | | | | | | | |
| 8A  Payee's Name & Address | | | | | | 8B.  New Address (Yes/No) | | | | | | | | 9.  Person's Entitled Initial & Stub Name | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| Payee Name | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 10.  Payee's Social Security Number | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| PAUL D. LOPEZ | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 11.  Prior Net Award Data | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | Monthly Payment | | | | | | | | | Effective Date | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | |  | | |  | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | |  | | |  | | | | | |
| OUT-OF-SYSTEM AWARD | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | |  | | |  | | | | | |
| CHAPTER 1606 FLIGHT CASE | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | |  | | |  | | | | | |
| 12 Award Data | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| Change | | Dep | | Rate | | | | | | Effective | | | Training | | | | Entitlement | | | | Attendance | | | | | | | Entitle |
| Reason | |  | |  | | |  | | | Date | | | Time | | | | Code | | | | Hours | | | | Dy | | | Charge |
| 00 | |  | | 255 | | | 00 | | | 11-1-99 | | | 7 | | | | 01 | | | |  | | |  |  | | |  |
|  | |  | |  | | |  | | |  | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | |  |  | | |  |
|  | |  | |  | | |  | | |  | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | |  |  | | |  |
|  | |  | |  | | |  | | |  | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | |  |  | | |  |
| 13.  Remarks | | | | | | | | | | | 21.  Children Data | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | Action | | | | Sex | | | | Birthday | | | | | | | | Status | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | | | | | | |  | |
| 14.  Vet Svc | 16.  Tot Chgs  5500.00 | | | 17.  # Corr | | | | | 18. Crs Code  341 | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | | | | | | |  | |
|  | 19.  Enrollment Period | | | | | | | | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | | | | | | |  | |
| 15.  Ex Chg | 20.  Extended Entitlement Indicator | | | | | | | | | | Number of Children over 8 ------------------------------ | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | |
| 22 Date of Claim  9-24-91 | | | 23A  Adjudicator Signs here  P.  Swartz | | | | | | | | 23B  Date  9-27-91 | | | | 24A  Authorizer Signs here  N.  Green | | | | | | | | | | | 24A  Date  10-1-91 | | |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

**Figure 12.05.  [Representation of Completed VA Form 22-1997  
Chapter 1606 Flight Training]**

---

| **Department of Veterans Affairs** | | | | | | | | | **EDUCATION AWARD** | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
Figure 12.06

| 1. Copy  (GDN Unit \_\_\_) | | | | | | 2.  File Number  30956565 | | | | | | | 3.  Payee  00 | | | | 4.  R. O. No  16 | | | | | | 5.  P O A  Code | | | | | | |
| P O A Name | | | | | | 6  Veteran's Social Security Number  456789012 | | | | | | | | | | | | | 7 Initials and Surname of Veteran  L L SCHMI | | | | | | | | | | |
| 8A  Payee's Name & Address | | | | | | | 8B.  New Address (Yes/No) | | | | | | | | 9.  Person's Entitled Initial & Stub Name | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| Payee Name | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 10.  Payee's Social Security Number | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| LINDA L. SCHMIDT | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 11.  Prior Net Award Data | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | Monthly Payment | | | | | | | | | Effective Date | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | |  | | |  | | | | | |
| OUT-OF-SYSTEM AWARD | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | |  | | |  | | | | | |
| CHAPTER 1606 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | |  | | |  | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | |  | | |  | | | | | |
| 12 Award Data | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| Change | | Dep | | | Rate | | | | | | Effective | | | Training | | | | Entitlement | | | | Attendance | | | | | | | Entitle |
| Reason | |  |  | |  | | |  | | | Date | | | Time | | | | Code | | | | Hours | | | | Dy | | | Charge |
| 00 | | 00 |  | | 41 | | | 10 | | | 11-1-99 | | | 6 | | | | 01 | | | |  | | |  |  | | |  |
|  | |  |  | |  | | |  | | |  | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | |  |  | | |  |
|  | |  |  | |  | | |  | | |  | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | |  |  | | |  |
|  | |  |  | |  | | |  | | |  | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | |  |  | | |  |
| 13.  Remarks | | | | | | | | | | | | 21.  Children Data | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| Chapter 1606 Corr.  Full time rate:  $255 eff 10/1/99 | | | | | | | | | | | | Action | | | | Sex | | | | Birthday | | | | | | | | Status | |
| 100% corres rate shown | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | | | | | | |  | |
| 14.  Vet Svc | 16.  Tot Chgs  2137.20 | | | | 17.  # Corr  052 | | | | | 18. Crs Code  424 | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | | | | | | |  | |
|  | 19.  Enrollment Period | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | | | | | | |  | |
| 15.  Ex Chg | 20.  Extended Entitlement Indicator | | | | | | | | | | | Number of Children over 8 ------------------------------ | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | |
| 22 Date of Claim  6-13-99 | | | | 23A  Adjudicator Signs here  P.  Swartz | | | | | | | | 23B  Date  6-20-99 | | | | 24A  Authorizer Signs here  N.  Green | | | | | | | | | | | 24A  Date  6-21-99 | | |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

**Figure 12.06.  Representation of Completed VA Form 22-1997  
Chapter 1606 Correspondence Training**

---

Figure 12.07

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **Department of Veterans Affairs** | | | | | | | | **EDUCATION AWARD** | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| 1. Copy  (GDN Unit \_\_\_) | | | | | 2.  File Number  279999999 | | | | | | | 3.  Payee  00 | | | | 4.  R. O. No  16 | | | | | | 5.  P O A  Code | | | | | | |
| P O A Name | | | | | 6  Veteran's Social Security Number | | | | | | | | | | | | | 7 Initials and Surname of Veteran  J C SEACA | | | | | | | | | | |
| 8A  Payee's Name & Address | | | | | | 8B.  New Address (Yes/No) | | | | | | | | 9.  Person's Entitled Initial & Stub Name | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| Payee Name | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 10.  Payee's Social Security Number | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| JERRY G SEACAT | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 11.  Prior Net Award Data | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | Monthly Payment | | | | | | | | | Effective Date | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | |  | | |  | | | | | |
| OUT-OF-SYSTEM AWARD | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | |  | | |  | | | | | |
| CHAPTER 1606 | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | |  | | |  | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | |  | | |  | | | | | |
| 12 Award Data | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| Change | | Dep | | Rate | | | | | | Effective | | | Training | | | | Entitlement | | | | Attendance | | | | | | | Entitle |
| Reason | |  |  |  | | |  | | | Date | | | Time | | | | Code | | | | Hours | | | | Dy | | | Charge |
| 00 | |  |  | 191 | | | 25 | | | 12-10-99 | | | 4 | | | | 01 | | | | G | | | 40 | 5 | | |  |
| 77 | |  |  | 140 | | | 25 | | | 6-10-00 | | | 4 | | | | 01 | | | | G | | | 40 | 5 | | |  |
| 67 | |  |  | NONE | | |  | | | 12-10-00 | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | |  |  | | |  |
|  | |  |  |  | | |  | | |  | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | |  |  | | |  |
| 13.  Remarks | | | | | | | | | | | 21.  Children Data | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | Action | | | | Sex | | | | Birthday | | | | | | | | Status | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | | | | | | |  | |
| 14.  Vet Svc | 16.  Tot Chgs | | | 17.  # Corr | | | | | 18. Crs Code  189 | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | | | | | | |  | |
|  | 19.  Enrollment Period | | | | | | | | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | | | | | | |  | |
| 15.  Ex Chg | 20.  Extended Entitlement Indicator | | | | | | | | | | Number of Children over 8 ------------------------------ | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | |
| 22 Date of Claim  9-24-99 | | | 23A  Adjudicator Signs here  P.  Swartz | | | | | | | | 23B  Date  9-27-99 | | | | 24A  Authorizer Signs here  N.  Green | | | | | | | | | | | 24A  Date  10-1-99 | | |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

**Figure 12.07.  Representation of Completed VA Form 22-1997  
Chapter 1606 On-the-Job Training**

---

| **Department of Veterans Affairs** | | | | | | | | | **EDUCATION AWARD** | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
Figure 12.08

| 1. Copy  (GDN Unit \_\_\_) | | | | | | 2.  File Number  399955566 | | | | | | | 3.  Payee  00 | | | | 4.  R. O. No  16 | | | | | | 5.  P O A  Code | | | | | | |
| P O A Name | | | | | | 6  Veteran's Social Security Number  567890123 | | | | | | | | | | | | | 7 Initials and Surname of Veteran  A   FAITH | | | | | | | | | | |
| 8A  Payee's Name & Address | | | | | | | 8B.  New Address (Yes/No) | | | | | | | | 9.  Person's Entitled Initial & Stub Name | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| Payee Name | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 10.  Payee's Social Security Number | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| ALAN FAITH | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 11.  Prior Net Award Data | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | Monthly Payment | | | | | | | | | Effective Date | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 537 | | | | | | 50 | | | 9-3-99 | | | | | |
| OUT-OF-SYSTEM AWARD  CHAPTER 30 (CAT II) | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 543 | | | | | | 50 | | | 10-1-99 | | | | | |
| TO ESTABLISH ACCRUED - DEPENDENCY ESTABLISHED | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | NONE | | | | | |  | | | 12-1-99 | | | | | |
| EVIDENCE IN FILE AT DATE OF DEATH | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | |  | | |  | | | | | |
| 12 Award Data | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| Change | | Dep | | | Rate | | | | | | Effective | | | Training | | | | Entitlement | | | | Attendance | | | | | | | Entitle |
| Reason | |  |  | |  | | |  | | | Date | | | Time | | | | Code | | | | Hours | | | | Dy | | | Charge |
| 26 | | 11 |  | | 587 | | | 50 | | | 9-3-99 | | | 3 | | | | 41 | | | | S | | | 09 |  | | |  |
| 37 | | 11 |  | | 593 | | | 50 | | | 10-1-99 | | | 3 | | | | 41 | | | | S | | | 09 |  | | |  |
| 22 | |  |  | | NONE | | |  | | | 12-1-99 | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | |  |  | | |  |
|  | |  |  | |  | | |  | | |  | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | |  |  | | |  |
| 13.  Remarks | | | | | | | | | | | | 21.  Children Data | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| Chapter 30 (CAT II) | | | | | | | | | | | | Action | | | | Sex | | | | Birthday | | | | | | | | Status | |
| Spouse and child established | | | | | | | | | | | | KIM | | | | F | | | | 8-21-92 | | | | | | | | 1 | |
| 14.  Vet Svc | 16.  Tot Chgs | | | | 17.  # Corr | | | | | 18. Crs Code | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | | | | | | |  | |
|  | 19.  Enrollment Period | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | | | | | | |  | |
| 15.  Ex Chg | 20.  Extended Entitlement Indicator | | | | | | | | | | | Number of Children over 8 ------------------------------ | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | |
| 22 Date of Claim | | | | 23A  Adjudicator Signs here  P.  Swartz | | | | | | | | 23B  Date  10-27-99 | | | | 24A  Authorizer Signs here  N.  Green | | | | | | | | | | | 24A  Date  11-1-99 | | |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

**Figure 12.08.  Representation of Completed VA Form 22-1997  
Chapter 30 Accrued Award**

---

| **Department of Veterans Affairs** | | | | | | | | | **EDUCATION AWARD** | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
Figure 12.09

| 1. Copy  (GDN Unit \_\_\_) | | | | | | 2.  File Number  39555123 | | | | | | | 3.  Payee  41 | | | | 4.  R. O. No  16 | | | | | | 5.  P O A  Code | | | | | | |
| P O A Name | | | | | | 6  Veteran's Social Security Number  999887777 | | | | | | | | | | | | | 7 Initials and Surname of Veteran  T D KING | | | | | | | | | | |
| 8A  Payee's Name & Address | | | | | | | 8B.  New Address (Yes/No) | | | | | | | | 9.  Person's Entitled Initial & Stub Name  T W KING | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| Payee Name | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 10.  Payee's Social Security Number | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| THOMAS W KING | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 11.  Prior Net Award Data | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | Monthly Payment | | | | | | | | | Effective Date | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 304 | | | | | | 00 | | | 1-4-95 | | | | | |
| OUT-OF-SYSTEM AWARD | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | NONE | | | | | |  | | | 3-18-96 | | | | | |
| CHAPTER 35 (DROPPED PRIORS) | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 304 | | | | | | 00 | | | 6-13-96 | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | NONE | | | | | |  | | | 8-26-96 | | | | | |
| 12 Award Data | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| Change | | Dep | | | Rate | | | | | | Effective | | | Training | | | | Entitlement | | | | Attendance | | | | | | | Entitle |
| Reason | |  |  | |  | | |  | | | Date | | | Time | | | | Code | | | | Hours | | | | Dy | | | Charge |
| 70 | |  |  | | 404 | | | 00 | | | 1-4-95 | | | 4 | | | | 81 | | | | Q | | | 12 |  | | |  |
| 61 | |  |  | | NONE | | |  | | | 3-18-96 | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | |  |  | | |  |
| 60 | |  |  | | 404 | | | 00 | | | 6-13-96 | | | 4 | | | | 81 | | | | Q | | | 12 |  | | |  |
| 61 | |  |  | | NONE | | |  | | | 8-26-96 | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | |  |  | | |  |
| 13.  Remarks | | | | | | | | | | | | 21.  Children Data | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| Chapter 35 Dropped Priors | | | | | | | | | | | | Action | | | | Sex | | | | Birthday | | | | | | | | Status | |
| Spouse and child established | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | | | | | | |  | |
| 14.  Vet Svc | 16.  Tot Chgs | | | | 17.  # Corr | | | | | 18. Crs Code | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | | | | | | |  | |
|  | 19.  Enrollment Period | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | | | | | | |  | |
| 15.  Ex Chg | 20.  Extended Entitlement Indicator | | | | | | | | | | | Number of Children over 8 ------------------------------ | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | |
| 22 Date of Claim | | | | 23A  Adjudicator Signs here  P.  Swartz | | | | | | | | 23B  Date  9-27-91 | | | | 24A  Authorizer Signs here  N.  Green | | | | | | | | | | | 24A  Date  10-1-91 | | |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

**Figure 12.09.  Representation of Completed VA Form 22-1997  
Chapter 35 Dropped Priors**

---

| **Department of Veterans Affairs** | | | | | | | | | **EDUCATION AWARD** | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
Figure 12.10

| 1. Copy  (GDN Unit \_\_\_) | | | | | | 2.  File Number  29987654 | | | | | | | 3.  Payee  00 | | | | 4.  R. O. No  16 | | | | | | 5.  P O A  Code | | | | | | |
| P O A Name | | | | | | 6  Veteran's Social Security Number  457890999 | | | | | | | | | | | | | 7 Initials and Surname of Veteran  E P JONES | | | | | | | | | | |
| 8A  Payee's Name & Address | | | | | | | 8B.  New Address (Yes/No) | | | | | | | | 9.  Person's Entitled Initial & Stub Name | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| Payee Name | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 10.  Payee's Social Security Number | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| EMILY P JONES | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 11.  Prior Net Award Data | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | Monthly Payment | | | | | | | | | Effective Date | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | |  | | |  | | | | | |
| OUT-OF-SYSTEM AWARD | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | |  | | |  | | | | | |
| CHAPTER 1606 (COAST GUARD RESERVE) | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | |  | | |  | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | |  | | |  | | | | | |
| 12 Award Data | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| Change | | Dep | | | Rate | | | | | | Effective | | | Training | | | | Entitlement | | | | Attendance | | | | | | | Entitle |
| Reason | |  |  | |  | | |  | | | Date | | | Time | | | | Code | | | | Hours | | | | Dy | | | Charge |
| 0X | |  |  | | 125 | | | 00 | | | 9-3-99 | | | 2 | | | | 01 | | | | S | | | 06 |  | | |  |
| 37 | |  |  | | 127 | | | 00 | | | 10-1-99 | | | 2 | | | | 01 | | | | S | | | 06 |  | | |  |
| 61 | |  |  | | NONE | | |  | | | 12-15-99 | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | |  |  | | |  |
|  | |  |  | |  | | |  | | |  | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | |  |  | | |  |
| 13.  Remarks | | | | | | | | | | | | 21.  Children Data | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| Chapter 1606 | | | | | | | | | | | | Action | | | | Sex | | | | Birthday | | | | | | | | Status | |
| Coast Guard Reserve | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | | | | | | |  | |
| 14.  Vet Svc | 16.  Tot Chgs | | | | 17.  # Corr | | | | | 18. Crs Code  205 | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | | | | | | |  | |
|  | 19.  Enrollment Period | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | | | | | | |  | |
| 15.  Ex Chg | 20.  Extended Entitlement Indicator | | | | | | | | | | | Number of Children over 8 ------------------------------ | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | |
| 22 Date of Claim  8-15-99 | | | | 23A  Adjudicator Signs here  P.  Swartz | | | | | | | | 23B  Date  9-4-99 | | | | 24A  Authorizer Signs here  N.  Green | | | | | | | | | | | 24A  Date  9-5-99 | | |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

**Figure 12.10.  Representation of Completed VA Form 22-1997  
Chapter 1606 Coast Guard**

---

Figure 12.11

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **Department of Veterans Affairs** | | | | | | | | | **EDUCATION AWARD** | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| 1. Copy  (GDN Unit \_\_\_) | | | | | | 2.  File Number  012345678 | | | | | | | 3.  Payee  00 | | | | 4.  R. O. No  16 | | | | | | 5.  P O A  Code | | | | | | |
| P O A Name | | | | | | 6  Veteran's Social Security Number | | | | | | | | | | | | | 7 Initials and Surname of Veteran  M A EVENS | | | | | | | | | | |
| 8A  Payee's Name & Address | | | | | | | 8B.  New Address (Yes/No) | | | | | | | | 9.  Person's Entitled Initial & Stub Name | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| Payee Name | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 10.  Payee's Social Security Number | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| MARY A EVENS | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 11.  Prior Net Award Data | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | Monthly Payment | | | | | | | | | Effective Date | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | |  | | |  | | | | | |
| OUT-OF-SYSTEM AWARD | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | |  | | |  | | | | | |
| SECTION 901 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | |  | | |  | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | |  | | |  | | | | | |
| 12 Award Data | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| Change | | Dep | | | Rate | | | | | | Effective | | | Training | | | | Entitlement | | | | Attendance | | | | | | | Entitle |
| Reason | |  |  | |  | | |  | | | Date | | | Time | | | | Code | | | | Hours | | | | Dy | | | Charge |
| 00 | |  |  | | 812 | | | 00 | | | 9-9-99 | | | 4 | | | | 91 | | | | S | | | 15 |  | | |  |
| 37 | |  |  | | 844 | | | 00 | | | 10-1-99 | | | 4 | | | | 91 | | | | S | | | 15 |  | | |  |
| 61 | |  |  | |  | | |  | | | NONE | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | |  |  | | |  |
|  | |  |  | |  | | |  | | |  | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | |  |  | | |  |
| 13.  Remarks | | | | | | | | | | | | 21.  Children Data | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| ORIGINAL SECTION 901 AWARD | | | | | | | | | | | | Action | | | | Sex | | | | Birthday | | | | | | | | Status | |
| SUBSISTENCE AND ASSISTANCE PAYABLE | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | | | | | | |  | |
| 14.  Vet Svc | 16.  Tot Chgs  0500.00 | | | | 17.  # Corr | | | | | 18. Crs Code  021 | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | | | | | | |  | |
|  | 19.  Enrollment Period | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | | | | | | |  | |
| 15.  Ex Chg | 20.  Extended Entitlement Indicator | | | | | | | | | | | Number of Children over 8 ------------------------------ | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | |
| 22 Date of Claim  9-24-99 | | | | 23A  Adjudicator Signs here  P.  Swartz | | | | | | | | 23B  Date  10-3-99 | | | | 24A  Authorizer Signs here  N.  Green | | | | | | | | | | | 24A  Date  10-3-91 | | |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

**Figure 12.11.  Representation of Completed VA Form 22-1997  
Section 901**

---

| **Department of Veterans Affairs** | | | | | | | | | **EDUCATION AWARD** | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
Figure 12.12

| 1. Copy  (GDN Unit \_\_\_) | | | | | | 2.  File Number  303003008 | | | | | | | 3.  Payee  00 | | | | 4.  R. O. No  16 | | | | | | 5.  P O A  Code | | | | | | |
| P O A Name | | | | | | 6  Veteran's Social Security Number  678901234 | | | | | | | | | | | | | 7 Initials and Surname of Veteran  S J SHELT | | | | | | | | | | |
| 8A  Payee's Name & Address | | | | | | | 8B.  New Address (Yes/No) | | | | | | | | 9.  Person's Entitled Initial & Stub Name | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| Payee Name | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 10.  Payee's Social Security Number | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| STANLEY J SHELTON | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | 11.  Prior Net Award Data | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | Monthly Payment | | | | | | | | | Effective Date | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | |  | | |  | | | | | |
| OUT-OF-SYSTEM AWARD | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | |  | | |  | | | | | |
| CHAPTER 32 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | |  | | |  | | | | | |
|  | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | | | |  | | |  | | | | | |
| 12 Award Data | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| Change | | Dep | | | Rate | | | | | | Effective | | | Training | | | | Entitlement | | | | Attendance | | | | | | | Entitle |
| Reason | |  |  | |  | | |  | | | Date | | | Time | | | | Code | | | | Hours | | | | Dy | | | Charge |
| 60 | |  |  | | 67 | | | 17 | | | 1-5-2000 | | | 2 | | | | 51 | | | | S | | | 06 |  | | |  |
| 61 | |  |  | | NONE | | |  | | | 5-19-2000 | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | |  |  | | |  |
|  | |  |  | |  | | |  | | |  | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | |  |  | | |  |
|  | |  |  | |  | | |  | | |  | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | |  |  | | |  |
| 13.  Remarks | | | | | | | | | | | | 21.  Children Data | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
| INCARCERATED PAYEE   5-19 MINUS 1-5 EQUALS 4 MONTHS, 14 DAYS | | | | | | | | | | | | Action | | | | Sex | | | | Birthday | | | | | | | | Status | |
| 300 TIMES 0.2238 EQUALS 67.17 | | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | | | | | | |  | |
| 14.  Vet Svc | 16.  Tot Chgs  0300.00 | | | | 17.  # Corr | | | | | 18. Crs Code | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | | | | | | |  | |
|  | 19.  Enrollment Period | | | | | | | | | | |  | | | |  | | | |  | | | | | | | |  | |
| 15.  Ex Chg | 20.  Extended Entitlement Indicator | | | | | | | | | | | Number of Children over 8 ------------------------------ | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |  | |
| 22 Date of Claim  2-10-00 | | | | 23A  Adjudicator Signs here  J.L.  Absher | | | | | | | | 23B  Date  2-18-00 | | | | 24A  Authorizer Signs here  K.  Neal | | | | | | | | | | | 24A  Date  2-19-00 | | |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

**Figure 12.12.  Representation of Completed VA Form 22-1997  
Chapter 32 Incarceration**

---

| 1.  Type of Award | | | | | | | | 2.  File Number  **399999999** | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
Figure 12.13

| CH 30     CH 32     CH 35   **X**  CH 1606     Other | | | | | | | | 3.  Payee No  **00** | |
| 4.  Action Codes | | | | | | | 5.  Power of Attorney Codes | | |
| Transaction Code | | Reason | | Effective Date | | | 6.  Name of Veteran | | |
| X   A.  STOP | 09 | 64 | | 01-07-99 | | | J D HAWKI | | |
| B.  SUSPEND | 10 |  | |  | | |  | | |
| C.  RESUME | 16 |  | | | | | 7.  Name of Person Entitled | | |
| 8.  New Address     YES         NO | | | | | | | 9.  Remarks  COAST GUARD  Mitigating Circumstances not submitted. | | |
|  | | | | | | |  | | |
|  | | | | | | |  | | |
| OUT-OF-SYSTEM STOP | | | | | | |  | | |
| CHAPTER 1606 | | | | | | |  | | |
| 10  Preparing Office    **X**   ADJ DIV.         OTHER | | | | | 11  Copy to      ELR         OTHER | | | | |
| 12  Prepared by  J. WEBB | 13 Date  6-19-99 | | 14  Approved By  L. LINCICOME | | | 15.Date  6-19-99 | | | 16  RO Number  16 |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

**Figure 12.13.  Representation of Completed VA Form 22-8046  
Chapter 1606 Coast Guard**

---

| **ROUTING AND TRANSMITTAL SLIP** | | | | Date | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
Figure 12.14

| 1.  RPO (3) | | | | Initials. | | Date |
| 2.  P. O. Box 4616 | | | |  | |  |
| 3.  Buffalo, NY 14240-4616 | | | |  | |  |
| 4 | | | |  | |  |
| 5. | | | |  | |  |
|  | Action |  | File |  | Note and Return | |
|  | Approval |  | For Clearance |  | Per Conversation | |
|  | As Requested |  | For Correction |  | Prepare Reply | |
|  | Circulate |  | For Your Information |  | See Me | |
|  | Comment |  | Investigate |  | Signature | |
|  | Coordination |  | Justify |  |  | |
| REMARKS  SUBJECT:                    \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_  TRANSMITTAL No.:  \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_     \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_  1.  22-1992     \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_  2.  22-1997     \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_  3.  22-8046     \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_  4.        572  DO NOT use this form as a record of approvals, concurrences, disposals, clearances, and similar actions. | | | | | | |
| FROM: (Name, organization symbol, Agency/Post) | | | | Room Number - Building | | |
|  | | | | Phone Number | | |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

**Figure 12.14.  Representation of Optional Form 41**