# Part 9: Chapter 9 - Miscellaneous

1. **Part 9: Chapter 9 - Miscellaneous**

**[Subchapter 1.](#SI) Timeliness Standards and Control of Workflow**  
[9.01  Timeliness Standards](#901)  
[9.02  Control of Workflow](#902)  
[9.03  Reserved](#903)  
[9.04  Reserved](#904)  
[9.05  Reserved](#905)  
[9.06  Reserved](#906)  
[9.07  Reserved](#907)  
[9.08  Reserved](#908)  
[9.09  Reserved](#909)  
[9.10  Quality Control Reviews](#910)  
[9.11  Reserved](#911)  
[9.12  Reserved](#912)  
[9.13  Reserved](#913)  
[9.14  Reserved](#914)  
  
**[Subchapter 2](#SII) – Miscellaneous Issues**  
[9.15  The 85-15 Percent Ratio Requirement](#915)  
[9.16  Reserved](#916)  
[9.17  Complaints Against a School or Job Training Establishment](#917)  
[9.18  Mass Changes of Ending Dates](#918)  
[9.19  School Closings](#919)  
[9.20  Monitoring School Liability Cases](#920)  
[9.21  Equal Opportunity Responsibilities](#921)  
[9.22  Annual Reporting Fee Payments](#922)  
[9.23  Reserved](#923)  
[9.24  Pay Listing](#924)  
[9.25  Study Abroad](#9.25)  
 

**SUBCHAPTER 1 – TIMELINESS STANDARDS AND CONTROL OF WORKFLOW**

**9.01  TIMELINESS STANDARDS**

---

**a. General.** VACO Education Service (EDU) coordinates with Office of Policy & Oversight (OPO) annually to establish a performance plan for approval activities. The performance plan contains specific timeliness standards for Outstanding, Exceeds Fully Successful, and Fully Successful levels. Annually, EDU will establish or revise metrics and align individual staff performance plans to meet OPO targets.

**1. Timeliness Metrics**

**a**. **Days to Complete:** To calculate the number of days an approval or VA action was completed (Accepted, Not Approvable, Returned); subtract the date the VA completed the approval/VA action from the date the VA received the approval/VA action plus 1 day. The data is Extracted from Salesforce (Completed date (-) Submitted date + 1 Day = Total number of days to complete).

**b**. **Days Pending:** To calculate the number of days an approval or VA action is pending; subtract the date the VA completed the approval/VA action from the date the VA received the approval/VA action plus 1 day. The data is extracted from Salesforce (Today’s date (-) Submitted date + 1 Day = Days pending)

**c**. **Average Days to Complete (ADC):** Defined as AC&L only workload, includes both SAA approval and VA actions, and does not include pending workload. EDU provides monthly ADC to OPO using fiscal year to date calculation.

**d**. **Average Days Pending (ADP):** Defined as FS&A only workload, both approval and VA actions, and does not include completed workload. EDU provides monthly ADP to OPO using fiscal year to date calculation.

**2. Prioritizing Incoming Work**. **EDU assigned staff will complete approval actions in the following order:**

**(1)** Withdrawals of approval creating overpayments:

**(2)** Suspensions of approval

**(3)** Changes decreasing payments

**(4)** New approvals entitling payments and changes increasing payments; and

**(5)** All others in the order of date of receipt.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**9.02  CONTROL OF WORKFLOW**

---

a. Salesforce Controls. All approval actions will be submitted, completed, returned, or invalidated within VACO EDU’s Salesforce Approval Module. Assigned staff can review the status of approval actions and monitor timeliness through Salesforce reporting tools.

Note: Requirements to update all EDU processing systems must be completed prior to closing out any approval action. For example, WEAMS, Enrollment Manager, communications to appropriate stakeholders, etc.

b. Reviews. VACO EDU assigned staff will review Salesforce weekly to identify maturing approval actions pending over 20 days. Assigned staff will take appropriate steps to complete the approval action to meet timeliness standards.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**9.03  [ RESERVED ]**

---

[Back to Top](##Top)

**9.04  [ RESERVED ]**

.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**9.05  [ RESERVED ]**

---

[Back to Top](##Top)

**9.06  [ RESERVED ]**

---

[Back to Top](##Top)

**9.07  [ RESERVED ]**

---

[Back to Top](##Top)

**9.08  [ RESERVED ]**

---

[Back to Top](##Top)

**9.09  [ RESERVED ]**

---

[Back to Top](##Top)

**9.10  QUALITY CONTROL REVIEWS**

---

**a.  General.**  On a weekly basis, [ELRs] may obtain listings of liaison actions completed during the [previous] week.  Use the listings to select actions for quality reviews.

**b.  Ready Screen Entries.**  On the READY screen, enter the command QCRE and the operator's password.  After completing the entries, press the Enter key.  The SQS (Statistical Quality Selection) screen will appear.  Enter an "X" next to liaison actions.  Press the Enter key to generate a [print-out] for each category requested.

**c.  Printout.**  The Statistical Quality Control [print-out] shows the type of issues selected in the Selection Category field.  Issues completed during the [pervious] week are listed along with the benefit type and EPC.  If no issues were completed, NO LISTING is printed on the first line.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**9.11  [ RESERVED ]**

---

[Back to Top](##Top)

**9.12  [ RESERVED ]**

---

[Back to Top](##Top)

**9.13  [ RESERVED ]**

---

 

[Back to Top](##Top)

**9.14  [ RESERVED ]**

---

[Back to Top](##Top)

 **SUBCHAPTER II.  MISCELLANEOUS ISSUES**

**9.15  THE 85-15 PERCENT RATIO REQUIREMENT**

---

**a. Purpose.** [Title 38 United States Code (U.S.C.) 3680A(d)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:3680A%20edition:prelim)%20OR%20(granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3680A)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) and [38 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 21.4201](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=802bcf577ddc6d18df13f37d6f833071&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14201) prohibit paying VA education benefits to VA beneficiaries enrolling in a program when more than 85 percent of the students enrolled in that program are having all or part of their tuition, fees, or other charges paid to or for them by the school or VA. If the ratio of Supported to Non-Supported Students exceeds 85 percent at the time a new VA beneficiary enters or reenters (after a break in enrollment), the student is not entitled to VA education benefits (except in the limited situations identified in section c. below). 

**b. 85/15 Reports.** Facilities are obligated by regulation [[38 CFR 21.4201(f)(2)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=fb19cba389cf30c77aa16974fe235b15&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14201)] to report all 85/15 Rule calculations to their Education Liaison Representative (ELR) of jurisdiction:

1. No later than 30 days after the beginning of each regular school term (excluding summer sessions), or before the beginning date of the next term (whichever is earlier), if the school is organized on a term, quarter, or semester basis.
2. No later than 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter if a school is not organized on a term, quarter, or semester basis. Separate reports for each enrollment period beginning during the reporting period must be submitted.

This is aligned with the quarters of the VA Fiscal Year which begins in October and ends in September. The due dates for these reports would be:

|  |  |
| --- | --- |
| **Due Date** | **Enrollment Period Beginning Between** |
| January 30th | October 1 through December 31 |
| April 30th | January 1 through March 31 |
| July 30th | April 1 through June 30 |
| October 30th | July 1 through September 30 |

 

3. The *Statement of Assurance of Compliance With 85 Percent Enrollment Ratios* is used to report this information.
4. VA tracks information on 85/15 compliance for all approved Educational and Training Institutions (ETIs) in the Web Enabled Approval Management System (WEAMS). WEAMS Reports (on the PA&I OBIEE Platform) are accessed to support the generation of reports for tracking of ETI compliance with 85/15. The Education Liaison Representatives (ELR) are responsible for updating 85/15 status in WEAMS.

**c. Exemptions and Waivers.**

1. Full Exemptions. The following are specifically exempted from the provisions of the 85/15 Rule.

1. ETI Full Exemption from the 85/15 Rule

1. In a farm cooperative training course. [38 USC 3680A (d)(2)(B)](https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:3680A%20edition:prelim)) and [38 CFR 21.4201 (c)(1)(i)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=fb19cba389cf30c77aa16974fe235b15&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14201)
2. Flying clubs (also known as "aero clubs") operating under regulations of the Armed Forces as "non-appropriated sundry fund activities.” [38 CFR 21.4201 (c)(1)(ii)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=fb19cba389cf30c77aa16974fe235b15&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14201)
3. Facilities which do not charge tuition, fees, or other charges. This provision routinely refers to sites approved for On-The-Job (OJT) or Apprenticeship (APP) training. [38 USC 3680A (d)(1)](https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:3680A%20edition:prelim)).

Note:

(1) Beneficiaries receiving Veteran Readiness and Employment (chapter 31) or Survivors’ and Dependents’ Educational Assistance (chapter 35) benefits. These VA beneficiaries must be counted as Supported Students for determining a program’s compliance with the 85/15 Rule but may be certified for benefits, even if the program is in violation of the 85/15 Rule.

(2) Veterans in pursuit of a program leading to a high school diploma, equivalency certificate, or a refresher, remedial, or deficiency course are exempt from the 85/15 Rule. [38 CFR 21.4201 (c)(2)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=fb19cba389cf30c77aa16974fe235b15&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14201)

2. Full Exemption of ETI by Type Documentation and Notification Procedures.

1. *Documentation.* The ELR must confirm this information on acceptance of the SAA approval and re-approval of the ETI.
2. *Updating WEAMS.*
   1. On the Additional Organization Details and Approval Information page, use the dropdown menu to update the “\***85/15 Status**” to “**Not applicable**”.
   2. Update the “\***85/15 Status Eff Date**” field directly under “\***85/15 Status**” using the format mm/dd/yyyy. The effective date is the date of approval, or the default date of 01/01/2021, whichever is later.
3. *Notification to the School.* Notification to the school is achieved with delivery of a copy of the update to WEAMS, the WEAMS Report.

2. 35 Percent Exemption (ETI Reporting Exemption):

i. Exemption Purpose and Requirements. Facilities with the 35% Exemption are exempt from the routine 85/15 reporting (as described in section c.(1)(i).). The facility is still obligated to maintain Compliance with the 85/15 Rule for all approved programs (the exemption is specific to the routine reporting; ETI with a 35% exemption from routine reporting must still maintain all 85/15 reports according to the timely date of calculation requirements and present them for review at all compliance surveys or on request by VA representatives), unless one of the facilities has an exception as outlined in the previous section (1) or in the exemption and waiver defined in the following sections (3 and 4).  
   
To be eligible for this 35 percent exemption, the ETI’s **total enrollment of VA beneficiaries** must not exceed 35 percent of the facility's total enrollment. The facility must actively apply for this exemption through the ELR of jurisdiction. Each branch of an ETI with its own separate administrative capability (see [M22-4 – Part IX – Chapter 8 - Section 8.04 c](https://vaww.vrm.km.va.gov/system/templates/selfservice/va_kanew/help/agent/locale/en-US/portal/554400000001048/content/554400000080120/Part%209:%20Chapter%208%20-%20Records,%20Files,%20and%20Reports) for a definition of separate administrative capability) must, actively and individually, calculate the total enrollment of VA beneficiaries and total ETI enrollment when applying for this exemption.                

The 85 percent enrollment ratio calculations for the current reporting period must accompany any application for a 35 Percent Exemption.  

1. 1. 1. ii. Exemption Period. The 35 Percent Exemption remains in effect for 24 months.
2. 1. 1. 2. A. The 35 Percent Exemption will otherwise remain in effect unless VA revokes the exemption, or until the ETI notifies their ELR of jurisdiction that their total VA beneficiary population exceeds 35 percent, at which point they are no longer eligible for the exemption*. The ELR must follow procedure to update WEAMS*.

B. The exemption generally covers all programs approved for VA education benefits.  However, if it is established or VA has reason to believe that some programs at the ETI may equal or exceed the 85% ration for Supported Students the VA can revoke the exemption for a specific program (i.e., require the ETI to routinely compute and report those programs only).

1. 1. 2. iii. Exemption Application, Approval, and Revocation Procedures.
2. 1. 1. 1. *Documentation.* The ETI must send the ELR the 35 Percent Exemption Request (VA Form 22-10216) with a completed Statement of Assurance of Compliance with 85 Percent Enrollment Ratios (VA Form 22-10215). NOTE: Vocational flight schools should instead include with the 35 Percent Exemption Request the Statement of Assurance of Compliance with 85 Percent Enrollment Ratios-Flight (VA Form 22-10217).
            1. 1. If on compliance, an ETI holding the 35 Percent Exemption is found to have failed to maintain compliance with the 85/15 Rule for any approved programs, the 35 Percent Exemption will be rescinded effective the date of calculation.
               2. If on compliance, the 35 Percent Exemption is confirmed, the ELR will update the effective date of the 35 Percent Exemption in WEAMS, which resets the 24-month effective period.
3. 1. 1. 2. *Partial Exemption to report 85/15.* A partial exemption may be granted if the VA has reason to believe that programs may equal or exceed 85 percent Supported Student enrollment and require the ETI to routinely compute and report those programs only. If the reports show that programs are consistently close to 85 percent (i.e., 79 percent to 85 percent Supported Students), the VA may require the school to report the ratio for those programs only.
         3. *Notification to the School.* The ELR must notify the ETI in writing of the exemption determination and will identify any programs specifically not exempt from reporting. The ELR or, if on compliance, the Surveyor will verify that 35 percent or less of the students are VA beneficiaries. The ELR will provide written notification of the finding to confirm or rescind the 35 Percent Exemption. These letters will be signed by the Chief Education Liaison Officer (CELO) or designee, (e.g., Supervisory Compliance and Liaison Specialist; SCLS).
         4. *Updating WEAMS.* On the Additional Organization Details and Approval Information page:
            1. Use the dropdown menu to update the “\*85/15 Status” to the appropriate response.
            2. Update the “\*85/15 Status Eff Date” field directly under “\*85/15 Status” using the format mm/dd/yyyy. The effective date is the date of calculation of the last 85/15 report submission. The default value is to 01/01/2021.
            3. Update the “\*35% Exemption” field using the dropdown menu.

1. No Exemption
2. Exemption Covers All Programs
3. Exemption Covers Specific Programs

4. Update the “35% Exemption Effective Date”. The effective date is the date the CELO, or designee, signs the letter confirming the 35% Exemption. The default value in WEAMS is 01/01/2021.

*A. No Records Required After Exemption to Report.* The ETI must maintain records for three years to show that 35 percent or less of its enrollment were VA beneficiaries at the time of the exemption to report. The ETI is not required to document that its enrollment remains at 35 percent or less. (This does not relieve the school from the requirement to maintain compliance with the 85/15.)  

The 35 percent enrollment verification is validated during compliance surveys and this information forwarded to the ELR of jurisdiction for documentation in WEAMS.  

1. 1. 1. 3. Department of Defense (DoD) Exemption. Facilities with this exemption are relieved from all provisions (reporting and calculating) of the 85/15 Rule.

A. Programs offered on U.S. military bases overseas may be open to any individuals allowed by the base commander. A facility on or immediately adjacent to a military base in the U.S. must offer its programs under contract with the (DoD) or Department of Homeland Security (DHS). The facility must restrict its programs to military personnel, their dependents, civilian employees of the military base, and members of the Selected Reserve. The facility is not required to apply for this exemption, but the VA is required to confirm the DoD exemption on approval and re-approval of the ETI. The State Approving Agency (SAA) may assist the ELR by providing this information in the approval notice. The Chief Education Liaison Officer (CELO) must advise the school in writing that the exemption has been confirmed and identify the conditions for maintaining the exemption. The ELR will send a copy of this letter to the SAA.

1. Civilian Employees of Military Installations. VA considers civilian employees of military installations to be:

1. Personnel hired to work on bases by base civilian employment officers;
2. Civil service employees of the DoD or DHS assigned to military bases;
3. Civilian employees of activities operated according to military Service Department regulations and controlled by the military such as base exchanges, commissaries, etc.;
4. Teachers who are under contract with schools for dependent children on military installations operated by Defense agencies (i.e., overseas dependents' schools); and
5. Teachers under contract with schools operated by a military service.

2. Change from Servicemember to Veteran. An 85/15 percent ratio requirement exemption does not jeopardize enrollment of a student who originally enrolled while on active duty and who maintains continuous enrollment following his or her discharge or release from active duty. The student may or may not have received VA education benefits while on active duty. The Regional Processing Offices (RPOs) will authorize benefits to the Veteran as long as he or she remains continuously enrolled. The school must maintain evidence for 3 years that the Veteran began the course while on active duty.
3. Change from Employee to Former Employee. If a student terminates his or her civilian employment at the base, the same principle applies to the student as to the student released from active duty.
4. Updating WEAMS.On the *Additional Organization Details and Approval Information* page:

1. Use the dropdown menu to update the “\*85/15 Status” to “Not applicable”
2. Update the “\*85/15 Status Eff Date” field directly under “\*85/15 Status” using the format mm/dd/yyyy. The status effective date is the effective date SAA approval. The default date value is 01/01/2021.
3. Update the “\*DoD Exemption” field using the dropdown menu. The default value is Not Eligible for Exemption.

* Exemption Covers All Programs
* Not Eligible for Exemption

 

(4) Education Service Waivers for Schools that Equal or Exceed 85% Supported Students. Facilities with this waiver are relieved from all provisions (reporting and calculating) of the 85/15 Rule for any programs specifically identified in the waiver for the period specified in the waiver.  
  
When a program equals or exceeds 85 percent Supported Students, the facility may apply for a waiver to the Director, Education Service by emailing the office of Program Coordination[EDUSERVEXECREVIEW.VBACO@va.gov](mailto:EDUSERVEXECREVIEW.VBACO@va.gov) (VAVBAWAS/CO/EDUCATIONSERVICEPROGRAMCOORDINATION). When applying, the facility must submit enough information to allow the Director, Education Service, to judge the merits of its request against the criteria below.  
 

A. Availability of similar programs in the vicinity of the facility requesting the waiver.

B. Similarity to schools that the Department of Education considers to be eligible to apply for a grant under the Strengthening Institutions Program or the Special Needs Program. The facilities in these programs are developing schools primarily serving a disadvantaged population. If a facility has been approved for a grant, the facility should provide a copy of its notice from the Department of Education. Otherwise, the facility must submit enough information to allow the Director, Education Service, to judge whether the school is similar. The pertinent criteria and data categories are published in title 34, CFR, chapter VI, part 624, subpart A; part 625, subpart A; and part 626, subpart A. The school does not have to meet the requirement that it is a "public or nonprofit" school.

C. Previous compliance history of the facility, e.g., false or deceptive advertising, complaints, timeliness and accuracy of enrollment certifications, and school liability indebtedness to VA.

D. General effectiveness of the courses in providing educational and employment opportunities to the Veteran population they serve. Factors to be considered include the percentage of Veteran beneficiaries completing the entire course, ratio of educational and general expenditures to full-time equivalency enrollment, etc.

**d. How to Count Students.**

(1) Branches and extensions with separate administrative capability must compute and report their 85/15 percent ratio separately from the main campus.

(2) Branches and extensions without separate administrative capability are part of the main campus or other branch providing administrative support and students attending these sites must be calculated with main campus or branch/extension site with separate administrative capability.

(3) Supported Students vs Non-Supported Students

|  |  |
| --- | --- |
| **Supported**  **The following type of student aid/loans are considered “Supported”** | **Non-Supported**  **The following type of student aid/loans are considered  “Non-Supported”** |
| Any student having all or part of their tuition, fees or other charges paid for them by the VA under title 38, U.S.C., or under title 10, U.S.C. | Any student who pays the full amount of tuition, fees, and other mandatory charges to the ETI prior to the end of the current reporting period (i.e., no later than 30 days from the start of a term or end of quarter) |
| Any student where the full amount of tuition, fees, and other mandatory charges has not been paid to the ETI prior to the reporting date (i.e., no later than 30 days from the start of a term or 30 days after the end of quarter), unless all of the following apply:   * The availability and requirements of the payment plan policy is published both on the ETI’s website and in the ETI’s approved catalog * The payment plan is available to any enrolled student interested in participating in such plans * The payment plan explicitly requires the student to pay the outstanding balance by the end of the 85/15 reporting period (academic term or calendar quarter) or by the end of the enrollment period, whichever is later * The payment plan policy prevents the student from training beyond the reporting period unless the outstanding balance is paid in full | Any student using an institutionally funded payment plan to pay the full amount of tuition, fees, and other mandatory charges when all the following apply:   * The availability and requirements of the payment plan policy is published both on the ETI’s website and in the ETI’s approved catalog * The payment plan is available to any enrolled student interested in participating in such plans * The payment plan explicitly requires the student to pay the outstanding balance by the end of the 85/15 reporting period (academic term or calendar quarter) or by the end of the enrollment period, whichever is later * The payment plan policy prevents the student from training beyond the reporting period unless the outstanding balance is paid in full |
| Any student who is granted any waiver or forgiveness of tuition, fees, or other charges | Any student receiving non-institutional aid (scholarships, grants, or other types of aid offered by a third-party entity not affiliated with the ETI |
| Any student receiving an institutionally funded loan, scholarship, or grant, if the policy for determining the recipient of such aid is designed or applied in an unequal way with respect to veterans and nonveterans alike excluding graduate students (i.e., restricted aid) | Any student receiving an institutionally funded loan, scholarship, or grant, if the policy for determining the recipient of such aid is equal with respect to veterans and nonveterans alike (i.e., unrestricted aid) |
|  | Any student receiving Tuition Assistance through the Department of Defense or the Department of Homeland Security |
|  | Any student receiving Title IV Department of Education aid |
|  | Any graduate student in receipt of Institutional Aid |

Note: If a student is receiving multiple types of aid and any of it is Supported, the student must be counted as a Supported Studentote: If a nt is receiving multiple types of aid and any of it is Supported, the student must be counted as a Supported Student

(4) VA may authorize VA benefits for chapter 31 and chapter 35 beneficiaries when they enter programs that exceed 85 percent. VA may not authorize benefits for chapter 33, chapter 30, chapter 32, and chapter 1606 beneficiaries when they enter programs that exceed 85 percent.  
  
When computing the percentage of students receiving VA benefits, the facility must count all VA beneficiaries on the Supported Student side of the ratio.

NOTE: Students taking more than one program (i.e., multiple majors at an Institution of Higher Learning), or concentration/track which requires its own 85/15 calculation, must be counted for each program they are enrolled in. This is true for both Supported and Non-Supported Students.

Example 1: A student is receiving chapter 33 benefits and is majoring in both Biology and Chemistry. For 85/15 Rule purposes, this student would count as a Supported Student for both the Biology and Chemistry programs.

Example 2: A student is completely self-paying for their schooling and is majoring in French, Latin, and Spanish. For 85/15 Rule purposes, this student would count as a Non-Supported Student for all three majors in which they are enrolled.

(5) The school must compute the full–time equivalency for part–time students based on the total number of hours in which the student is enrolled for the term and add it to the number of full–time students, e.g., take the total number of one-half time students, divide by two, and add the quotient to the number of full–time students.  
  
A student is counted as a full-time or part-time student under each approved concentration or track based on the student’s overall rate of pursuit or individual training time.

(6) The facility must count students who have not declared a major together in a separate category. Students must declare a major at the time specified by the facility, but in no event later than when they complete half of the course. The facility must count students in a remedial or deficiency course with the other students in their declared majors or certificate courses. If they have not declared a major or selected a certificate course, the facility must count them with other students who have not declared a major or selected a certificate course.

There is no requirement for the ETI to calculate or report guest or non-matriculated students.  
  
However, the law prohibits the enrollment of a Servicemember in a remedial or deficiency course if his or her enrollment would cause the course to exceed 85 percent. If a Servicemember has declared a major or selected a certificate course, the facility should count the Serviceperson with the other students in the program. If a Servicemember has not declared a major or selected a certificate course, the facility will count the Servicemember on the VA side of the ratio for the remedial or deficiency course.

(7) If a program has a total student population of one supported student – the facility is not in violation of the 85/15 Rule. The ETI is not officially in violation of the 85/15 Rule until a second supported student enters the program.

**e. Changes in Enrollment.** Changes in enrollment which happen on or after the first day of term do not require 85/15 calculations to be amended and resubmitted. Changes in enrollment where students preregistered but never attended do require 85/15 calculations to be amended and resubmitted.

**f. School Not Confirmed for a Full or DoD Exemption**. An ETI not confirmed for a full exemption (see section c.1) or the DoD exemption (see section c.3) must continue to calculate its Supported and Non-Supported Students for each program not granted a waiver of the 85/15 Rule. When the facility certifies each student’s enrollment (VA Form 22-1999), the facility is positively attesting that by certifying that student they will remain in compliance with the provisions of the 85/15 Rule.

85/15 Rule compliance will be confirmed during compliance surveys.

**g. Ratio Exceeds 85 Percent.** When it is identified that a program has enrollments exceeding 85 percent supported students, the ELR must update the relevant data fields in WEAMS.

(1) Notify CELO. The ELR must notify Supervisory Compliance and Liaison Specialist (SCLS) and CELO of jurisdiction by email. If the ETI has a 35% Exemption – the exemption should be reviewed and based on the guidance from the CELO, may be revoked or revised.

(2) Amend WEAMS. The ELR must update WEAMS as follows:

(i) Find the currently approved ETI in WEAMS

A. Select Program Specific Org Info Tab from the column to the left of your screen.

B. Select the Additional Organizational Details & Approval Information tab.

   1. Update the “\*85/15 Status” to the appropriate selection from the dropdown menu. Default value is ‘All Programs in Compliance’.

i. All Programs in Compliance. All programs are in compliance with the 85/15 Rule.

ii. One or More Programs in Violation. One or more programs are in violation with the 85/15 Rule.

iii. All Programs in Violation. All programs are in violation of the 85/15 Rule. This option is also selected when an ETI fails to report 85 percent enrollment ratios.

iv. Not Applicable.

2. Update the “\*85/15 Status Eff Date” field directly under “\*85/15 Status” using the format mm/dd/yyyy. The effective date is either the date of calculation of the most recent 85/15 report submission or the date the ETI is determined exempt from provisions of the 85/15 Rule, as appropriate. The default value is ‘01/01/2021’.

3. Update the “\*35% Exemption” field using the dropdown menu. The default value is set to ‘No Exemption’.

i. No Exemption. No exemption of reporting 85 percent enrollment ratios.

ii. Exemption Covers All Programs. The ETI is exempt from the 85/15 Rule as it maintains an enrollment population of 35% or fewer recipients of benefits under Title 38 or Title 10.

iii. Exemption Covers Specific Programs. The ETI is eligible for the 35 Percent Exemption; however, one or more programs exceed(s) 85% enrollment of Supported Students.

4. Update the “35% Exemption Effective Date” field to reflect the most recent 35% Exemption confirmation. Use the date format mm/dd/yyyy. The effective date of the most recent 35 Percent Exemption confirmation. Note: this date field should be left blank when the institution does not have an approved 35 Percent Exemption.

5. Update the “\*DoD Exemption” field using the dropdown menu. The default value is ‘Not Eligible for Exemption’.

i. Not Eligible for Exemption. The ETI is not eligible for the Department of Defense Exemption of the 85/15 Rule.

ii. Exemption Covers All Programs. The ETI has met the requirements for the Department of Defense Exemption of the 85/15 Rule.

6. Save changes. Note, Approvals, Compliance, & Liaison (AC&L) staff should ensure that no error messages are generated to ensure all changes to the webpage will be saved.

(C) Select the “Programs” Tab. In the “Program Detail” section in the affected program(s) “Remarks” section, AC&L staff will add the following statement “SUSPENDED FROM NEW ENROLLMENTS EFFECTIVE MM/DD/YYYY FOR EXCEEDING 85/15 RULE”, and change program status to “Suspended”, and update program status date to reflect the effective date of suspension.

Note: The date given for the “Approved” status is the original date of program approval. This date, when the program is approved, should mirror that of the “Effective” date listed in the Program Detail in WEAMS.

(D) If 35 Percent Exemption is being revoked – Refer to (c)(2)(iii)(D)(3) & (4) of this section for instructions on updating WEAMS to reflect revocation of the 35 Percent Exemption.

(3) Notify Facility. Along with providing a copy of the VA Form 22-1998, WEAMS Report, the ELR must inform the ETI that VA beneficiaries who are continuously enrolled may continue to be certified for benefits; however, they may not submit enrollment certifications for VA beneficiaries initially enrolling or returning following a break in enrollment (excluding summer and winter breaks) on or after the effective date of the suspension (except for chapter 31 or chapter 35 beneficiaries).  
  
A copy of this notification and the updated WEAMS Report must also be submitted to the SAA of jurisdiction. The ETI will continue to submit certifications for VA beneficiaries who are already enrolled in the program, have been previously paid for the program, and have been continuously enrolled in the program. The school must continue to submit all changes in enrollments (reductions, terminations, etc.) for enrolled VA beneficiaries.

**h. Effect on VA Beneficiaries.** RPOs should not authorize benefits for VA beneficiaries enrolling on or after the date the enrollment exceeded 85 percent unless the beneficiary is continuously enrolled in the same program at the same ETI. RPOs may authorize awards for chapters 31 and chapter 35, or section 901 of Public Law 96-342, beneficiaries who enroll or reenroll on or after the date the enrollment exceeded 85 percent.

(1) Facility Organized on a Term, Quarter, or Semester Basis. Beneficiaries with running awards who remain continuously enrolled will not have their benefits suspended even if the percentage of VA beneficiaries exceeded 85 percent at the time of their enrollment. Beneficiaries enrolled in an ETI organized on a term basis do not have to attend summer sessions or interim sessions considered continuously enrolled.  
  
Example - a facility has two semesters, a summer session, and an interim session between the fall and spring semester. VA beneficiaries choose not to attend the interim and the summer session. For 85/15 percent ratio purposes, the beneficiaries are considered continuously enrolled.  
  
NOTE: If a VA student attends a term, but chooses to not use VA benefits, they are considered to still be continuously enrolled. Continuous enrollment is based on the student’s enrollment status attending the facility, not their decision to utilize VA benefits.

(2) Facility Not Organized on a Term, Quarter, or Semester Basis. At a facility not organized on a term basis, breaks during the summer or at any time while the facility is in session constitutes a break in training, unless the break was due to circumstances beyond the student's control. An enrollment is considered continuous if a break in enrollment is wholly due to circumstances beyond the student's control.

**i. Reinstatement After Exceeding 85 Percent.** When the ETI certifies that its program(s) no longer exceed 85 percent VA beneficiaries, the ELR must take the following steps:

(1) Amend WEAMS. The ELR must update WEAMS as follows:

(i) Find the currently approved facility in WEAMS

1. Select Program Specific Org Info Tab from the column to the left of your screen.

2. Select the Additional Organizational Details & Approval Information tab.

A. Update the “\*85/15 Status” to the appropriate selection from the dropdown menu. Default value is ‘All Programs in Compliance’.

i. All Programs in Compliance. All programs are in compliance with the 85/15 Rule.

ii. One or More Programs in Violation. One or more programs are in violation with the 85/15 Rule.

iii. All Programs in Violation. All programs are in violation of the 85/15 Rule. This option is also selected when an ETI fails to report 85 percent enrollment ratios.

iv. Not Applicable.

B. Update the “\*85/15 Status Eff Date” field directly under “\*85/15 Status” using the format mm/dd/yyyy. The effective date is either the date of calculation of the most recent 85/15 report submission or the date the ETI is determined exempt from provisions of the 85/15 Rule, as appropriate. The default value is ‘01/01/2021’.

(ii) In the “Program Detail” section in the affected program(s) “Remarks” section, the ELR will amend the following statement:

“SUSPENDED FROM NEW ENROLLMENTS EFFECTIVE MM/DD/YYYY FOR EXCEEDING 85/15 RULE” to “85% SUSPENSION MM/DD/YYYY – MM/DD/YYYY”.

The effective dates of suspension will reflect the effective date of suspension for violation through the day prior to the suspension lift.

(iii) In “Program Detail” ELR will update the program status to “Approved” and enter the effective date.

Note: The date listed for the “Approved” status is the original date of program approval. This date, when the program is approved, should mirror that of the “Effective” date listed in the Program Detail in WEAMS.

(2) Notify School. The ELR must notify the ETI that the suspension has been lifted and the effective date of the action by provided a copy of the VA Form 22-1998, WEAMS Report. The effective date is the date the program(s) no longer exceed 85 percent. The ELR must send a copy of the updated WEAMS Report to the SAA.

**j. Failure to Report.** The ETI is obligated to provide all 85/15 information when requested. Should the ETI fail to do so, VA must notify the ETI of consequences of failure to report. If calculations are not received within 10 calendar days of the date of notification, VA will take the following actions:

(1) Make Referral to SAA. Generate and release to SAA of jurisdiction a referral to review the ETI for violation of [38 United States Code (USC) 3690](https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=3690&f=treesort&fq=true&num=27&hl=true&edition=prelim&granuleId=USC-prelim-title38-section3690) and [38 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 21.4209](https://ecfr.io/Title-38/se38.2.21_14209).

(2) Upon receipt of SAA letter to suspend ETI, ELR Amend WEAMS. Find the currently approved facility in WEAMS

(i.) Select Program Specific Org Info Tab from the column to the left of your screen.

(ii.) Select the Additional Organizational Details & Approval Information tab.

A. Update the “\*85/15 Status” to ‘All Programs in Violation’.

B. Update the “\*85/15 Status Eff Date” field directly under “\*85/15 Status” using the format mm/dd/yyyy. The effective date is the last day of the last prior term the ETI was compliant with the 85/15 Rule.

(iii) Select the Issue and Remarks tab in the facility document folder and update the Remarks block to reflect the following statement:

“85/15 SUSPENSION EFF MM/DD/YYYY. SUSPENSION OF PAYMENT FOR ALL APPROVED PROGRAMS DUE TO FAILURE TO REPORT 85/15 CALCULATIONS FOR ANY NEW TERMS BEGINNING ON OR AFTER MM/DD/YYYY”.

The effective date of suspension will reflect the last day of the last prior term the school was compliant.

(iv) The ELR will update the \*Status of the facility to “Suspended” and the update the \*Status Effective date to the last day of the last prior term the school was found compliant.

(3) Notify School. The ELR should follow standard notification procedures to include sending a copy fo the updated VA Form 22-1998, WEAMS Report to ETI.

**k. Reinstatement Following Suspension of All Programs.** When the SAA lifts the suspension of the ETI, the ELR reviews submitted 85/15 calculations to confirm that programs are in compliance with the 85/15 Rule.

(1) Amend WEAMS. Find the currently approved facility in WEAMS

(i.) Select Program Specific Org Info Tab from the column to the left of your screen.

(ii.) Select the Additional Organizational Details & Approval Information tab.

1. 1. Update the “\*85/15 Status” as appropriate. The default value is ‘All Programs in Compliance’
      1. All Programs in Compliance. All programs are in compliance with the 85/15 Rule.
      2. One or More Programs in Violation. One or more programs are in violation with the 85/15 Rule.
      3. All Programs in Violation. All programs are in violation of the 85/15 Rule. This option is also selected when an ETI fails to report 85 percent enrollment ratios.
      4. Not Applicable.
   2. Update the “\*85/15 Status Eff Date” field directly under “\*85/15 Status” using the format mm/dd/yyyy. The effective date is the last day of the last prior term the ETI was compliant with the 85/15 Rule.

(iii) Select the Issue and Remarks tab in the facility document folder and update the Remarks block to reflect the following statement:

“85/15 SUSPENSION FROM MM/DD/YYYY TO MM/DD/YYYY DUE TO FAILURE TO REPORT”.

The effective dates of suspension will reflect the date the suspension letter is signed by the CELO or designee for violation through the day prior to the day the letter authorizing the suspension lift is signed.

(iv) The ELR will update the \*Status of the facility to “Approved” and the update the \*Status Effective date to the ETI’s original approval date.

1. 2. The ELR should follow standard notification procedures to include sending a copy of the updated VA Form 22-1998, WEAMS Report to the ETI.

**l.** **Facilities approved for both GI Bill® benefits and the Veteran Employment Through Technology Education Courses (VET TEC) Pilot Program.** VET TEC benefits are Title 38 benefits ([38 U.S.C. 3001](https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:3001%20edition:prelim))). Staff assigned to the Oversight and Accountability Division have the sole approval authority for VET TEC programs, while the SAA of jurisdiction (or VA acting as the SAA) has approval authority for GI Bill® benefits. In order to keep a clear delineation between a facility’s VET TEC approval and their GI Bill® approval, when a facility is approved for VET TEC, they are assigned a VET TEC specific Facility Code (second character of the Facility Code is “V”). The facility will submit all VET TEC specific enrollments using the VET TEC Facility Code and all GI Bill® and/or Veteran Readiness and Employment (VR&E) enrollments using their GI Bill® Facility Code.

(1) 85/15 Calculations – GI Bill® benefits. When the facility has a program that is approved for both GI Bill® benefits and VET TEC benefits, the facility must count any GI Bill® or VET TEC beneficiaries as “Supported Students”.

If the GI Bill-approved facility is exempt from having to calculate 85/15 compliance (i.e., the facility has the DOD Exemption or the Education Service Waiver, or does not charge tuition, fees, or other charges) then the facility is not obligated to monitor or report 85/15 calculations to the ELR of jurisdiction. This exemption or waiver to 85/15 does not apply to the facility’s obligation to monitor and report 85/15 calculations to the Oversight and Accountability Division with approval authority over VET TEC.  
  
**Example:** A facility in Washington DC has an Education Service Waiver. The facility would not have to monitor or report 85/15 calculations to the DC ELR. The facility would continue to monitor and report 85/15 calculations to the VET TEC Team.

(2) 85/15 Calculations – VET TEC Pilot Program. When the facility has a program that is approved for both GI Bill® benefits and VET TEC benefits, the facility must count any GI Bill® or VET TEC beneficiaries as “Supported Students”.

If the facility is exempt from having to calculate 85/15 compliance (i.e., the facility is a Preferred Provider) then then facility is not obligated to monitor or report 85/15 calculations to the Oversight and Accountability Division with approval authority over VET TEC. This exemption to 85/15 does not apply to the facility’s obligation to monitor and report 85/15 calculations to their ELR of jurisdiction.  
  
**Example:** A facility in Washington DC is a Preferred Provider. The facility would not have to monitor or report 85/15 calculations to the VET TEC Team. The facility would continue to monitor and report 85/15 calculations to the ELR of jurisdiction.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**9.16  [ RESERVED ]**

---

[Back to Top](##Top)

**9.17  COMPLAINTS AGAINST A SCHOOL OR JOB TRAINING ESTABLISHMENT**

---

**a.  Referral to SAA.**  The ELR with jurisdiction over a school or job training establishment is responsible for handling a complaint against or from a school or job training establishment.  If the complaint involves approval criteria, the ELR must refer it to the SAA and request a reply within 30 days.  The ELR must follow up if the SAA does not reply within 30 days.  The ELR or ECSS must investigate an Equal Opportunity complaint according to M27-1, part III, section III.

**b.  Referral to Another ELR.** If the school or job training establishment is under the jurisdiction of another ELR, the ELR must refer the complaint to the ELR of jurisdiction, advise the complainant(s) in writing that it was necessary to refer the complaints to the ELR of jurisdiction, and provide the address of the other ELR.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**9.18  MASS CHANGES OF ENDING DATES**

---

**a.  General.** Whenever there is a mass change in ending dates, all the awards need to be adjusted.   This situation can occur if the SAA withdraws the approval of a school or job training establishment or VA discontinues payments.

**b.   Request From School.**  The ELR may also request a mass ending date change when a school changes the ending dates of a term, quarter, or semester.  The new ending date may be before or after the old ending date.

**c.  Alternatives**

(1)  VA Forms 22-1999b, Notice of Change of Student Status, Submitted by School.  Due to the amount of time necessary to process a mass ending date change, it is usually preferable for the school to submit VA Form 22-1999b, or for the ELR to use the Compliance Survey Listing to notify the RPO of records requiring termination.  If the SAA withdrawal or VA discontinuance is an adverse action, the school or job training establishment may not be willing to cooperate.  The ELR should suggest to the school or job training establishment that it is in its best interest to cooperate and avoid school liability.  Due to the notification requirements when VA suspends or discontinues payments, it may be difficult to time the discontinuance of payments to occur after the students have received the 30-day notice and in time to prevent the release of payments for periods after the 30-day notification period has expired.  Before requesting a mass ending date change, the ELR should consult with the Adjudication Division at the RPO to determine the most beneficial method of making the change.

(2)  Request to Hines.  The ELR must recognize that there are two major limitations that may limit the usefulness of this alternative.  First, all the records to be changed must have one common ending date.  For example, the school's spring semester was scheduled to end on May 10, 1996.  The school extends the date until May 17, 1996, to accommodate a week they were closed due to inclement weather.  Students were certified with the May 10th ending date.  No students have been certified for the summer sessions.  The second limitation is the time limit.  The ELR must send an e-mail to VAVBAHIN/BDC/CUSV or a letter requesting the change in the ending date to the Hines BDC.  The e-mail or letter must reach the Hines BDC before the month preceding the month of the change.  Using the dates in the above example, the e-mail or letter must be received by Hines by April 1st.  The Hines BDC must receive the e-mail or letter before the "BDC cutoff:  Mass ending date and school code changes" date on the chapter 35 schedule of operations.  Send the letter with the following information to:

Director, (201/33F)

VA Hines Benefits Delivery Center

Lock Box 66303

AMF O’Hare, IL  60666

(i)  The old ending date (no pay date);

(ii)  The new ending date (no pay date); and

(iii)  The school's facility code and the full name of the school.

**d.  Impact on Continuous Enrollments.** It may not be necessary to change the ending date for students who remain enrolled through the end of the term and who are entitled to payment for the break between terms.  For example, a school has certified students for the academic year, excluding summer term.  The school changes the ending date of the spring term.  During the spring term the school must question students regarding their intentions for enrollment during summer, as they would have if there had not been a change in the ending date of spring term.  For those students continuing, the schools must submit VA Form 22-1999, Enrollment Certification, with the information on the summer term.  For those students who will not be attending the summer term, the schools must submit VA Form 22-1999b to change the ending date for the spring term.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**9.19  SCHOOL CLOSINGS**

---

**a.  Delegation.**  The Secretary granted the Education Service Director and RPO Directors the authority to invoke the payment provisions of [38 U.S.C. 3680(a)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:3680%20edition:prelim)%20OR%20(granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3680)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true), [38 CFR 21.4203(b)(1)](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=802bcf577ddc6d18df13f37d6f833071&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_14203), 38 CFR 21.4205(c)(1), [38 CFR 21.7140(d),](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=802bcf577ddc6d18df13f37d6f833071&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17140) and [38 CFR 21.7640](https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?gp=1&SID=802bcf577ddc6d18df13f37d6f833071&ty=HTML&h=L&mc=true&r=SECTION&n=se38.2.21_17640)(b).  The Education Service Director, or the RPO Director of jurisdiction, as appropriate, may authorize Adjudication to pay students during periods when a school is temporarily closed under established policies based upon an executive order of the President or due to an emergency situation.  The Director of the RPO of jurisdiction is granted authority if only that Director’s jurisdiction is affected; the Director of Education Service is granted authority if multiple jurisdictions are impacted by the event.

**b.** Education Service Director or **RPO Director Determinations.** The Education Service Director or RPO Director must determine if the school is or will be temporarily closed under established policies based upon an Executive Order of the President or due to an emergency situation.  The determination should generally be based upon evidence submitted by the school.

(1)  Executive Order 12020.  The President signed Executive Order 12020 to authorize the payment of benefits to veterans and their dependents when a school is temporarily closed to conserve energy.  A determination under Executive Order 12020 must be based upon showings by the school that energy consumption will be abnormally high during the winter months or that available energy supplies will be inadequate to meet the needs of the school.  The school's plans to close must be due to an interest of energy conservation.

(i)  Limitations.  Periods of payment may not exceed 45 days.  Breaks must be between quarters or semesters to invoke Executive Order 12020.  However, the authority of the Education Service Director or the RPO Directors to authorize Adjudication to pay benefits during other types of emergencies may be used to justify payments.  Executive Order 12020 may be exercised only once by a school during a 12-month period.

(ii)  Types of Evidence.  Types of evidence submitted by a school requesting consideration under Executive Order 12020 must include, but is not limited to the following:

A.  Copies of official school records that reflect abnormally high energy usage during past winters or letters from energy suppliers that indicate inadequate supplies to meet the school's needs; and

B.  Letters from the school president or other appropriate school officials stating that the school is closing in the interest of energy conservation.

(2)  Emergency Situations.  Emergency situations include, but are not limited to, energy shortages, severe weather, and strikes by school's faculty or staff.  The Education Service Director or the RPO Director's determination should generally be made after the emergency situation exists.  However, if a school preschedules a closing during a period other than between quarters or semesters (a situation not covered by Executive Order 12020) there must be a strong showing by the school that there was an impending emergency situation.  Just the possibility of an emergency situation existing is not sufficient to allow continued payments under the emergency situation provisions of [38 U.S.C. 3680(a).](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:3680%20edition:prelim)%20OR%20(granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3680)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true)

(i)  Limitations.  When a school closes due to a strike by its faculty or staff, the RPO Directors may authorize Adjudication to continue payments for 30 days.  Three workdays before the end of the 30-day period, the ELR must provide the Education Service with a full assessment of the current strike situation.  Continue to pay benefits beyond the 30-day period unless advised by Education Service to terminate benefits.

(ii)  Types of Evidence.  Types of evidence submitted by a school requesting consideration under emergency situations might include, but are not limited to the following:

A.  Letters from the school president or other appropriate school officials that outline the emergency situation and other pertinent facts supporting the necessity for the school's closing.

B.  Other evidence that factually establishes the existence of an emergency situation.

**c.  Administrative Review.** The Education Service Director or the RPO Director of jurisdiction, as appropriate, must advise the school of its right to an administrative review.  The review request must be submitted in writing and received by VA within one year of the date of VA’s letter notifying the school of the decision. A review of the decision will include the evidence of record and any other pertinent evidence the school may wish to submit. The affirmation or reversal of the initial decision based on an administrative review is final.

       (1) When the RPO Director of jurisdiction is responsible for the initial decision, the review will be conducted by the Director

             of  Education Service.  Any request for an administrative review must be made through the RPO Director, who will

             review any additional information submitted before sending it to Education Service. 

                   (2) When the Director of Education Service is responsible for the initial decision, the review will be conducted by the

                         Under Secretary for Benefits.  Any request for an administrative review must be made through the Director of Education

                         Service, who will review any additional information submitted before sending it to Education Service.

**d.  Notification to VA Students.** Adjudication must notify all affected VA students that they may conserve entitlement by electing not to receive payment for periods when a school is closed.  Vocational Rehabilitation and Counseling must notify Chapter 31 students that extensions of their entitlement will be determined on an individual basis and will depend on whether they can complete their rehabilitation programs on the date scheduled in their rehabilitation plans.  Adjudication must determine whether an overpayment will be created if a student elects to conserve entitlement.  If an overpayment will be created, Adjudication must notify the student that the overpayment will be subject to collection in the usual manner.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**9.20 MONITORING SCHOOL LIABILITY CASES**

---

The ELR must notify the General Counsel of any new developments concerning a school that has a school liability case that has been appealed or is in litigation.  The ELR must advise the General Counsel of plans to conduct a compliance survey or liaison visit, the results of the compliance survey, and the subjects discussed during the liaison visit.  (See pt. I, ch. 7, for additional information.)

[Back to Top](##Top)

**9.21  EQUAL OPPORTUNITY RESPONSIBILITIES**

---

See M27-1, part III, chapter 13, for the ESU's responsibilities for VA's equal opportunity program.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**9.22  ANNUAL REPORTING FEE PAYMENTS**

---

**a.  General.** Title [38, US Code, section 3684](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:3684%20edition:prelim)%20OR%20(granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3684)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true), authorizes payment of a reporting fee of $7.00 to schools and JATCs (Joint Apprenticeship Training Committees) for each VA student in training on October 31.  For each student in training on October 31 for which VA made an advance payment for the fall term, the school receives an additional $4.00.  Effective January 1, 1990, schools or JATCs are entitled to reporting fee payments for chapter 31 trainees.  Schools that provide Special Restorative Training, Independent Living, Extended Evaluation, and Special Improved Rehabilitation Potential evaluations are not entitled to reporting fees for students receiving these services.  The law does not permit payment to individualized instructors.  [Public Law 105-368](https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-105publ368/pdf/PLAW-105publ368.pdf), the Veterans Programs Enhancement Act of 1998, amended [38 U.S.C. 3684(c)](http://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=(title:38%20section:3684%20edition:prelim)%20OR%20(granuleid:USC-prelim-title38-section3684)&f=treesort&edition=prelim&num=0&jumpTo=true) to require VA to base the reporting fee on the number of VA students who enroll in a school during the entire calendar year.  This provision is effective with calendar years beginning after December 31, 1998.  The first payments under the new calculation method were issued in January 2000.

**b.  Change in Reporting Fee Month.**  A school or JATC may request that the annual reporting fee payment be based on a month other than October.  ELRs should inform school or JATC officials who request a change in the reporting fee month about the change in the calculation [method effective January 1, 1999.

**c. Facilities Not Eligible for Payments.** Reporting fees are not payable to training facilities that are subdivisions of the federal government, including VA facilities.  The ELR should establish a bar to payment (code A) on the Institution Processing Modify – Page 2 screen if training is other than OJT or apprenticeship.  Otherwise, a payment would be released.

**d. School Liability Withholding.**  The Chief, Finance activity, must notify the ELR when with- holding the annual reporting fee payments is necessary in cases of uncontested school liability and contested school liability when a final decision has been made.  The ELR must establish a bar to payment (code D) on the Institution Processing Modify – Page 2 screen. Hines BDC automatically lifts the payment bar each March. Each April, the ELR should consult with the Chief, Finance activity, to determine if the payment bar should be reestablished.

**e. Hines Processing.** In December, the Hines BDC will process a Full-File Pass to identify all students who were enrolled during the current year.  The run will also identify those students who were enrolled in more than one school or JATC during the year. Checks should be released [in January of the following year.  A list of payments made and a list of students for whom payment could not be made, will be sent to each RO's Finance activity.

 

|  |  |
| --- | --- |
| **CODE** | **REASON** |
| A | School address incomplete or too long for check. |
| B | Bar to payment set. |
| C | Approved for Chapter 31 only. |
| L | School liability exists. |
| M | Manila RO to authorize payment. |
| N | School not approved. |
| R | No state name in address. |
| S | Facility code in master record does not match any code in the facility file. |

 

**f. "Pay List."** The Hines BDC sends each ELR a "Pay List" each January with a gummed address label for each facility.  The "Pay List" is arranged alphabetically by student name and shows the file number and amount of the payment made for each VA student counted in the reporting fee computation. The ELR must send a copy of the list to the school or JATC for arrival as close as possible to the date that the facility receives the payment.

**g. Requests From School or JATC for Additional Payments.** If a school or JATC identifies students not on its lists who were enrolled, the school or JATC may request additional payments for those students.  Students do not have to have running awards on December 31, for the school or JATC to be entitled to the payment.  Students must actually be in training during the previous year.

[Back to Top](##Top)

**9.23  [RESERVED]**

---

[Back to Top](##Top)

**9.24  PAY LISTING**

---

**a.  General.** The Hines BDC generates a pay listing for each processing cycle on the chapter 35 Schedule of Operations for schools that request the listing.  The listing is in numerical order by RPO number, VA eight-digit claim number, and social security number.  The listing contains the RPO number, the VA claim number, the amount paid, the period covered, the training time, any accounts receivable deducted, the veteran's name and address, the Zip code, and the benefit.  If students are receiving payments via EFT (Electronic Fund Transfer), the legend "EFT" appears in lieu of the student's address.

**b.  Turning the Listings On and Off.**  ELRs should check the pay listing field on the Institution Processing Modify – Page 2 screen if a school is receiving the pay listing.  Effective April 1, 2001, the pay listing processing was redesigned to use the pay listing field to turn the listings on and off. 

[Back to Top](##Top)

**9.25 STUDY ABROAD**

1. **General.**  Study abroad is defined as taking courses in a foreign country at a VA approved University in the pursuit of an educational objective. The VA does not have a specific regulation that covers Study Abroad, this section is provided to identify policy for education service. Note, 38 CFR 21.4260 is reference for foreign IHL approval and compliance actions. Effective 1 August 2020, VA benefits can only be used for study abroad if the student’s enrollment is aligned to paragraph (b, c, or d):

1. **Direct Enrollment.** Study at an approved foreign institution, all current approved foreign institutions facility codes are located in WEAMS.
   1. A student enrolls at a foreign school that is approved for GI Bill benefits.
      1. Student’s degree program must be specifically approved for VA benefits
      2. SCO at foreign school certifies the enrollment.
      3. VA will pay the foreign school’s certified tuition and fees, up to the national maximum tuition and fee rate.  Yellow Ribbon is not available.
      4. VA will pay a monthly housing allowance to the student at the overseas rate.  Standard monthly housing allowance rules apply.

1. Study at an approved foreign school in accordance with an approved contract agreement with a U.S. school.  Contract agreements must be specifically approved by the State Approving Agency (SAA) of jurisdiction for the U.S. school.
   1. A student enrolled in a degree program at a U.S. school wishes to attend an approved foreign school that is approved for GI Bill® benefits. This degree includes an SAA approved agreement to have a portion of the program taught at an approved foreign school.
   2. Courses taken at foreign school must apply to an approved degree program.
   3. SCO at foreign (guest) school certifies enrollment of their courses.
   4. If applicable, SCO at the U.S. school also certifies enrollment of their courses.  Tuition and fees can also be paid if concurrently enrolled, subject to the annual cap as applies.  U.S school can include Yellow Ribbon as applicable.
   5. Standard monthly housing allowance rules apply.

1. The U.S. school serves as the parent school and pre-approves courses at an approved foreign school as acceptable transfer credits at the U.S. school. 
   1. A student’s degree program at the U.S. (parent) school must be specifically approved but not necessarily the exact degree at the approved foreign school.
   2. Courses taken at foreign school must apply to an approved degree program.
   3. SCO at foreign (guest) school certifies enrollment of their courses.
   4. If applicable, SCO at the U.S. school also certifies enrollment of their courses.  Tuition and fees can also be paid if concurrently enrolled, subject to the annual cap as applies.  U.S school can include Yellow Ribbon as applicable.
   5. Standard monthly housing allowance rules apply.

1. **Overseas Branch of U.S. School.** Study at an approved overseas branch or extension site of a U.S. school.
   1. A student is enrolled in a U.S. school that has a branch or extension overseas.
      1. Student’s degree program must be approved for VA benefits.
      2. SCO certifies enrollment based on student’s facility code location of courses taken.
      3. VA will pay the tuition and fees in accordance with home school’s status (public or private school).  Can include Yellow Ribbon as applicable.
      4. VA will pay a monthly housing allowance to the student at the overseas rate.  Standard monthly housing allowance rules apply.
2. **Home School Instructor Led.** Study abroad as part of an approved program at a U.S. school.  Course led by employee of the U.S. school.
   1. A student enrolls in a program of education at a U.S. institution and it includes a course taught in a foreign country.  For example, a required course includes a field trip to study art history at European museums, led by an employee of the U.S. school. 
      1. Student’s degree program must be specifically approved for VA benefits.
      2. SCO for the U.S. school certifies the enrollment.
      3. VA will pay the tuition and fees in accordance with home school’s status (public or private school).  Can include Yellow Ribbon as applicable.
      4. VA will provide a monthly housing allowance to the student based on the U.S. school’s location. Standard monthly housing allowance rules apply.

1. **What’s Not Approved for Study Abroad.** 
   1. Third-party broker, a private company charges a third-party fee to a student to coordinate a study abroad program.
   2. VA cannot pay a private company’s third-party fees, or any fees related to a school’s third-party agreement.
   3. U.S. school has an arrangement with a foreign school to exchange a certain number of students.  Each school agrees to bill their own students at their own rates.
   4. VA cannot pay students studying under any circumstances not specifically approved by the SAA of jurisdiction of the U.S. school.
2. **Additional Study Abroad Notes.**
   1. Students must be enrolled in courses that apply to their program.
   2. All options include standard payment of books and supplies stipend.
   3. VA cannot pay airfare, amenities or travel fees.
   4. Room and board charges cannot be reported to VA.
   5. Yellow Ribbon is not available at foreign schools.

[Back to Top](##Top)